2 
  
 
Al Ryada University for Science and Technology  
Mission / Vision 
 
 
Mission
 
The University is committed to providing a distinguished graduate capable of innovating 
and competing in the labour market and meeting the challenges of the future by providing a 
stimulating educational environment with intelligent and sophisticated techniques and 
strengthening partnerships with local and international universities and institutions and 
employing scientific research to achieve academic and research excellence while adhering 
to national identity, ethical values and community responsibility. 
 
 
Vision
 
Al Ryada University for Science and Technology aspires to be a distinguished and highly 
competitive leading university at the local and international levels in line with the 
sustainable development goals.

3 
  
 
College of Nursing 
Mission / Vision 
 
Mission
 
The College of Nursing at the Al Ryada University for Science and Technology in Egypt is 
committed to utilizing a variety of modern educational methods and theories and 
continually developing them in line with scientific developments and educational quality 
standards. This will result in the graduation of distinguished cadres with a high 
competitiveness at the local, regional, and international levels in the practice of the nursing 
profession and in the field of scientific research. The College is committed to actively 
participating in the continuous development of various aspects of the profession, which will 
positively impact on the profession and society, achieving sustainable development.  
 
الرساله  
تلتزم كليه التمريض بجامعه الرياده للعلوم والتكنولوجيا بمصر ان تستخدم الوسائل والنظريات التعليميه الحديثه المتعدده 
وتطويرها بصفه مستمره بما يتوافق مع المستجدات العلميه ومعايير جوده التعليم مما يؤدي الى تخريج كوادر متميزه 
لديها قدره تنافسيه عاليه على المستوى المحلي والاقليمي والدولي في ممارسه مهنه التمريض وفي مجال البحث العلمي 
والمشاركه الفاعله في التطوير المستمر للجوانب المختلفه للمهنه مما ينعكس بالايجاب على المهنه والمجتمع وتحقيق  
التنميه المستدامه. 
  
Vision 
The College of Nursing at the Al Ryada University for Science and Technology in Egypt 
aspires to become a leading college in embracing comprehensive, distinguished education 
that supports students' personal capabilities and leads to self-confidence and continuous 
self-development. This positively impacts fair professional competition locally, regionally, 
and internationally, and advances the educational, research, and societal aspects of the 
profession. 
 
الرؤية 
 تطمح كليه التمريض بجامعه الرياده للعلوم والتكنولوجيا بمصر ان تصبح من الكليات الرائده في تبني التعليم الشمولي  
المتميز الذي يدعم القدرات الشخصيه للطلاب ويؤدي الى الثقه بالنفس والتطوير الذاتي المستمر مما ينعكس ايجابيا على  
المنافسه المهنيه الشريفه محليا واقليميا ودوليا وتطوير الجوانب التعليميه والباحثيه والمجتمعيه للمهنه.

4 
  
 
Medical -Surgical Nursing Department 
Mission / Vision 
 
Mission
 
The primary goal of the medical and surgical nursing department is to focus on delivering 
the best possible nursing care across a range of specializations while also providing 
students with a foundational understanding of medical concepts and practices. 
 
الرسالة 
الهدف الأساسي لقسم التمريض الباطني والجراحي هو التركيز على تقديم أفضل رعاية تمريضية ممكنة عبر مجموعة  
من التخصصات مع تزويد الطلاب أيضا بفهم أساسي للمفاهيم والممارسات الطبية.  
 
 
Vision
 
In addition to offering top-notch nursing services that are sensitive, current, and focused on 
the needs of the patient, the department of medical and surgical nursing is fundamentally 
built on competence, critical thinking, and a holistic perspective of the patient.
 
 
الرؤية 
بالاضافة الى تقديم خدمات تمريضية من الدرجة الأولى حساسة وحديثة وتركز على احتياجات المريض ، فان قسم 
التمريض الباطني والجراحي مبني بشكل أساسي على الكفاءة والتفكير النقدي والمنظور الشامل للمريض.

5 
  
 
Course Specification based on Competency 2025-206 
توصيف مقرر دراسى 
بناء على المعايير الاكاديميه المبنيه على الكفايات  
1.  Basic Information 
Course Title (according to the bylaw) Medical surgical Nursing I (Practical) 
 
Course Code (according to the bylaw) CLN 24119 
Department/s participating in delivery of the course   Medical-Surgical Nursing Department 
Number of credit hours/points of the course (according to 
the bylaw) 
Theoretical Practical Other 
(specify) Total 
3 Credit 
hours    
Course Type اجباري 
Academic level at which the course is taught الفرقة/المستوي الثاني 
Academic Program Bsc in nursing sciences 
Faculty/Institute 
Faculty of Nursing 
University/Academy 
Al Ryada University for Science and 
Technology 
Name of Course Coordinator  
Assist.Prof. Wafaa Mohammed  
Assist.Prof. Zinab Mohammed

6 
  
Course Specification Approval Date 
9/25/2025 
Course Specification Approval (Attach the decision/minutes of 
the department /committee/council ....)       
17/25/9/2025 
 
2. Course Overview  
This course provides nursing students with essential clinical skills and diagnostic procedures necessary for effective patien t care in various healthcare 
settings. Learners will develop foundational knowledge and practical competencies related to the surgical environment, labora tory investigations, 
intravenous fluid therapy, blood transfusion, electrocardiography (ECG), and nasogastric tube (NGT) management. The course also integrates practical 
skills such as deep breathing & coughing exercises, chest physiotherapy, and incentive spirometer. 
 
3. Course specification based on competency 
Competency Key elements Course subject Course objectives 
Domain 1. Professional and ethical practice

7 
  
1.1. Demonstrate 
knowledge, 
understanding, 
responsibility and 
accountability of the 
legal obligations for 
ethical nursing 
practice. 
 
 
 
1.1.1 . Demonstrate 
utilizing the 
legislative 
framework and the 
role of the nurse 
and its regulatory 
functions. 
 
 
 
 
* Fluids and 
electrolytes 
 
Intravenous therapy 
and intravenous 
solutions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1.1.1. Define 
intravenous therapy and 
its purpose in healthcare. 
 
1.1.1.2. Identify different 
types of intravenous 
solutions and their 
specific uses 
 
 1.1.1.3. Describe the 
indications and 
contraindications for 
administering IV therapy. 
 
 
1.1.1.4. Calculate IV 
fluid flow rates manually 
and use an infusion

8 
  
 
1.1.3. Practice 
nursing based on 
policies and 
procedural guidelines 
considering patient/ 
client rights. 
 
 
 
 
Wound dressing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pump. 
 
 
 
 
1.1.3.1. Document all 
aspects of IV therapy 
accurately and 
completely in the 
patient's medical record 
 
1.1.3.2. Perform a 
surgical scrub, donning 
sterile gowns, and sterile 
gloving with meticulous 
attention to detail. 
 
1.1.3.3. Demonstrate  
proper hand hygiene and 
surgical hand scrubs 
 
1.1.3.4. perform a sterile 
field and correctly handle 
sterile instruments and 
supplies. 
 
1.1.3.5. prepare accurate 
sponge, gauze and 
instrument counts before 
dressing.  
 
 
1.1.3.6. Demonstrate the 
correct technique for 
removing old dressings 
and applying a new one. 
 
1.1.3.7. Prepare a sterile 
field correctly and 
maintain its sterility 
throughout the procedure 
by avoiding 
contamination.

9 
  
  
 
 
 
 
1.1.4 - Demonstrate 
responsibility and 
accountability for 
care within the scope 
of professional and 
practical level of 
competence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Blood transfusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.1.3.8. Applying the 
principles of a septic 
technique 
 
 
 
1.1.4.1. Recognize the 
indications and 
contraindications for the 
transfusion of different 
blood products. 
 
1.1.4.2. Demonstrate the 
correct technique for 
initiating and monitoring 
a blood transfusion 
 
Domain 2. Holistic patient centered care 
2.1. Provide holistic 
and evidence -based 
nursing care in 
different practice 
settings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.6. Examine 
evidence that 
underline clinical 
nursing practice to 
offer new 
insights into nursing 
care for patients, 
families, and 
communities 
 
Chest 
physiotherapy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.6.1. Demonstrate 
correct techniques for 
manual chest 
physiotherapy 
(percussion, vibration, 
postural drainage). 
 
2.1.6.2. Apply suctioning 
techniques appropriately 
and safely in clinical 
settings. 
 
2.1.6.3.   Use adjunct 
devices as incentive 
spirometer to aid in

10 
  
 
 
Electrocardiogram  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nasogastric tube  
 
 
 
 
 
 
airway clearance. 
 
2.1.6.4. Perform correct 
12-lead ECG electrode 
placement on a patient or 
manikin. 
 
2.1.6.5.  Record a 
standard 12 -lead ECG 
using appropriate 
equipment. 
 
2.1.6.6. Interpret basic 
ECGs to identify rate and 
rhythm.  
 
 
 
 
2.1.6.7. Perform safe and 
effective insertion of a 
nasogastric tube on a 
manikin or patient under 
supervision. 
 
2.1.6.8.   Verify correct 
placement of the NGT 
using accepted clinical 
methods. 
 
2.1.6.9. Administer 
feeding or medication via 
NGT safely and 
appropriately.

11 
  
 
2.1.6.10. Provide ongoing 
care and maintenance of 
the NGT, including 
flushing and monitoring. 
 
Domain3. Managing people, work environment and quality 
3.3. Review health 
care outcomes in the 
light of quality 
indicators and 
benchmarks to 
achieve the ultimate 
goals of improving 
the quality of 
nursing care. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.3. Utilize quality 
indicators and 
benchmarks to 
evaluate the effect of 
improvements in 
the delivery of 
nursing care. 
 
 
 
 
 
Laboratory 
investigations and 
diagnostic studies  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.3.1. Clarify the normal 
ranges and clinical 
significance of key lab 
tests, for examples (CBC, 
liver function tests, 
cardiac enzymes).  
 
3.3.3.2. Differentiate 
between normal and 
abnormal results of 
different lab tests. 
 
3.3.3.3. Collect basic lab 
specimens (e.g., blood, 
urine, stool) using proper 
technique and infection 
control measures. 
3.3.3.4. Interpret basic lab 
and diagnostic results in 
the context of patient 
conditions.

12 
  
 
4. Teaching and Learning Methods  
1- Demonstration and re-demonstration 
2. Role play  
3. Peer learning 
4. OSCE simulation 
5. Field training 
 
6. Case study 
7. Performance-based training 
 
5. Course Schedule

13 
  
Number 
 of the 
Week 
Scientific content of the course 
(Course Topics) 
 
Total Weekly 
Hours 
Expected number of the Learning Hours 
Theoretical teaching 
(lectures/discussion groups/ ......) 
Training 
(Practical/Clinical/ ......) 
Self-learning 
(Tasks/ Assignments/ 
Projects/ ...) 
Other 
(to be determined) 
1st  
1. Wound dressing  
• Scrub field 
• Principles of aseptic technique   
3 
- 
6 
- - 
2nd  
2. Wound dressing (cont.)  
• Antiseptic solutions. 
• Preparing a sterile field. 
• Preparing package  
3 
- 
6 
- - 
3rd  
3. Wound dressing (cont.) 
• Dressing technique  
• Wound irrigation 
• Removal of suture  
3 - 
6 
- - 
4th  Revision 3 - 6 - - 
5th  
4. Fluids and electrolytes  
• Intravenous therapy and intravenous 
solutions  
3 - 
6 
- - 
6th  
5. Fluids and electrolytes  
(cont.)  
• Blood transfusion  
3 - 
6 
- - 
7th   Mid-term 3  6   
8th  6. Laboratory investigations & diagnostic 
procedures 
3  6   
9th  
7. Respiratory system 
• Deep breathing & coughing exercises 
• Chest physiotherapy 
• Incentive spirometer  
3  
6 
  
10th  8. ECG  3  6   
11th  9. NGT  
 
3  6

14 
  
 
6. Methods of students’ assessment 
No. Assessment Methods  Assessment 
Timing 
(Week Number) 
Marks/ 
Scores 
Percentage  
of  
total course Marks 
1 Mid-term Exam           th7 40 --- 
2 Final clinical exam                 13 60 40% 
3 Post class quizzes  4,11 10 ---- 
4     
  
Activities ------- 10 ----- 
5      Participation, punctuality, behavior & 
absenteeism  
------ 10 ------- 
6     
  
Final oral exam 13 20 ----- 
 
 
7. Learning Resources and Supportive Facilities 
Learning 
resources 
(books, 
scientific 
references, 
etc.)  
The main (essential) 
reference for the 
course 
(must be written in 
full according to the 
scientific 
documentation 
method) 
- American College of Emergency Physicians. (2021).  First aid manual: The 
step-by-step guide for everyone (10th ed). United Kingdom: Dorling 
Kindersley. ISBN: 978-0241481879. 
- Berman, A., Snyder, S.J., & Frandsen, J.  (2021). Kozier & Erb’s 
Fundamentals of Nursing: Cocepts, Process, and Practice (11th ed) : United 
Kingdom: Pearson Education. ISBN -13: 978 -0135428733. ISBN -10: 
12th   Revision 3  6   
13th  10. Final OSCE 3  6

15 
  
0135428734 
- Berman, A., & Snyder, S. (2021). Student workbook and resource guide for 
Kozier & Erb’s fundamentals of nursing (10th ed). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson. ISBN: 978-0-13-517897-3. 
- Berman, A., Snyder, S. J., Levett -Jones, T., Dwyer, T., Hales, M., Harvey, 
N., ... & Stanley, D. (2018).  Kozier & Erb’s Fundamentals of Nursing  (4th 
ed.). Sydney, Australia: Pearson Australia. ISBN: 978-1-4886-8734-1. 
- Berman, A., Snyder, S. (2016). Student workbook and resource guide for 
Kozier &Erb’s Fundamentals of nursing (9th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. ISBN 13: 9780138024666. 
- Craven, R., Hirnle, C.  & Sharon, J. (2021).  Fundamentals of Nursing 
Human Health and Function ,  Study Guide edition (8th ed). Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins. 
- Kozier & Erb’s. (2018). Fundamentals of Nursing Concepts, Process, and 
Practice (11th ed). 
- Perry, A, Potter, P., Ostendorf, w. & Laplante.  (2021). Clinical Nursing 
Skills and Techniques (10 th ed). Mosby, Elsevier 
- Taylor, C., Lillis, C., LeMone, P., Lynn, P., & LeBon, M. (2021). Skills 
checklists for fundamentals of nursing: The art and science of nursing care 
(8th ed). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN: 978 -
1975115218. 
Other References 
- Leonard, P. (2021). Quick & easy medical terminology (7th ed.). St. Louis, 
MO: Saunders/Elsevier. ISBN: 978-0323357626. 
- Billings, D. (2021). Lippincott’s Q&A review for NCLEX -RN and Prep U 
(12th ed). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams and 
Wilkins. ISBN: 978-1975142580. 
- Nugent, P. M., & Vitale, B. A. (2020). Fundamentals success: A course 
review applying critical thinking to test taking (4th ed). Philadelphia, PA: 
F.A. Davis Company. ISBN: 978-1719642627.

16 
  
Electronic Sources 
(Links must be 
added) 
https://www.verywellhealth.com/the-electrocardiogram-ecg-1745304 
 
 
https://www.nursingtimes.net/clinical-archive/cardiovascular-clinical-
archive/electrocardiogram-1-purpose-physiology-and-practicalities-17-05-2021/ 
 
Learning Platforms 
(Links must be 
added) 
http://medicaldictionary.thefreedictionary.com/deep.breathing.and.coughing.exersice 
 
 http://www.livestrong.com/article/225116-deep-breathing-coughing-technique/ 
 
Other 
 (to be mentioned) 
All Medical -Surgical Nursing Teaching Staff. (2024).  Fundamentals of Nursing 
Procedure Manual.1 st ed. Faculty of Nursing, Al Ryada University for Science and 
technology. Egypt. 
 
Supportive 
facilities & 
equipment 
for 
teaching 
and 
learning  
Devices/Instruments  
Data show 
Supplies Models 
Electronic 
Programs  
------- 
Skill Labs/ 
Simulators 
sim man 
Virtual Labs  
Other (to be 
mentioned) 
Smart board, white board 
 
Name and Signature 
  
Head of Department 
Assist.Prof. Wafaa Mohammed  
 
 
Name and Signature 
 
 
Course Coordinator 
Assist.Prof. Wafaa Mohammed  
Assist.Prof. Zinab Mohammed  
Dr. Bardies Shaban

17 
  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Page No Topic 
 Wound Dressing:  
- Scrub field 
- Principles of aseptic techniques 
- Antiseptic solutions 
- Preparing sterile field 
- Preparing dressing cart  
- Preparing package 
- Dressing technique 
- Wound irrigation  
- Removal of suture 
 Fluids and electrolytes: 
- Intravenous therapy and intravenous solutions 
- Blood transfusion 
 Laboratory investigations and diagnostic procedures 
 Respiratory system: 
- Deep breathing & coughing exercises 
- Chest physiotherapy 
- Incentive spirometer  
 Cardiology: 
- ECG 
 Gastrointestinal tract: 
- Nasogastric tube feeding

20 
  
  
Surgical Hand Scrub 
➢ Definition 
- Surgical hand washing or scrub is used to remove soil and most transient 
microorganisms from the skin. 
➢ Purpose: 
1. Remove dirt and transient microorganisms 
2. Reduce resident skin flora 
3. Delay microbial regrowth 
4. Prevent surgical site infections 
5. Maintain a sterile operating environment 
 
➢ Equipment 
• Deep sink with foot or knee controls for dispensing water and soap (faucets 
should be high enough for hands and forearms to fit comfortably) 
• Antimicrobial agent approved by the health care facility 
• Surgical scrub sponge with plastic nail pick. 
• Paper face mask, cap or hood, surgical shoe covers 
• Sterile towel 
• Sterile pack containing sterile gown 
• Protective eyewear (glasses or goggles) 
 
Steps Rationale 
Consult manufacturer policy regarding required 
length of time and antiseptic to use for hand 
antisepsis. 
Guidelines v a r y r e g a r d i n g 
i d e a l time needed and 
antiseptic to use for surgical 
scrub. 
Be sure that fingernails are short, and clean. 
Artificial nails should be removed. Natural nails 
should be less than 1/4 inch long 
 
 
- Long nails and chipped or old 
polish increase number of 
bacteria residing on nails. 
- Artificial nails are known to 
harbor gram -negative 
microorganisms and 
                    fungus

21 
  
Inspect condition of cuticles, hands, and 
forearms for abrasions, cuts, or open lesions. 
Broken skin permits 
microorganisms to enter layers 
of the skin. 
Remove bracelets, rings, and watches in a 
locker. 
 
Jewelry may harbor or 
protect microorganisms from 
removal. 
Routine hand hygiene 
 
To reduce transmission of 
infection. 
Apply surgical shoe covers, cap or hood, face 
mask, and protective eyewear 
Mask prevents escape from 
microorganisms that can 
contaminate hands into air. 
Turn on water using knee or foot controls and 
adjust to comfortable temperature. 
Knee or foot controls prevent 
contamination of hands after 
scrub. 
Pre-scrub wash/rinse : Wet hands and arms 
under running warm water  and lather  with 
detergent to 5 cm (2 inches)  above elbows. 
(Hands need to be always above elbows.) 
Keeping hands elevated allows 
water to flow from least to most 
contaminated areas. 
Rinse hands and arms thoroughly under 
running water. 
Remember to keep hands above elbows. 
Rinsing removes transient 
bacteria from fingers, hands, and 
forearms. 
Under running water clean under nails of both 
hands with nail pick. Discard after use 
Removes dirt and organic 
material that harbors large 
numbers of microorganisms. 
 
Surgical hand scrub (with brush) 
a. Wet clean sponge and apply antimicrobial 
agent. Visualize each finger, hand, and arm as 
having four sides. 
Wash all four sides effectively. Scrub the nails of 
Friction loosens resident 
bacteria that adhere to skin 
surfaces.

22 
  
one hand with 15 strokes and all surfaces of each 
finger. Scrub the thumb, palm, and posterior side 
of hand with 10 strokes each 
 
Scrub side of fingers. 
Divide the arm mentally into three thirds: scrub 
each third 10 times with circular strokes. Rinse 
brush and repeat sequence for the other arm.          
A two-brush method may be substituted. 
Eliminates transient 
microorganisms and reduces 
resident hand flora. 
 
Scrub forearms 
 
 
Rinse arms. 
Discard brush. Flex arms and rinse from 
fingertips to elbows in one continuous motion, 
allowing water to run off at elbow 
Hands remain the cleanest part 
of upper extremities 
Turn off water with foot or knee control, with 
hands elevated in front of and away from body. 
Enter operating room suite by backing into room. 
Keeps hands free of 
microorganisms 
Approach sterile setup: grasp sterile towel, 
taking care not to drip water onto sterile setup 
Water contaminates sterile setup. 
Bending slightly at waist, keeping hands and 
arms above waist and outstretched, grasp one 
end of sterile towel  and dry one hand, moving 
Dry skin from c l e a n e r  (hands) 
to less clean (elbows)

23 
  
from fingers to elbow in a rotating motion 
Repeat drying method for other hand by 
carefully reversing towel or using a new sterile 
towel. 
Prevents accidental contamination 
Drop towel into linen hamper or circulating 
nurse’s hand. 
Prevents accidental 
contamination. 
 
 
Proceed with sterile gowning

24 
  
Applying a Sterile Gown and Performing Closed Gloving 
➢ Purpose 
1. Maintain a sterile field 
2. Protecting patients from infection 
3. Protect staff from exposure  to blood, body fluids, and potentially infectious 
materials during surgical procedures, reducing the risk of cross-contamination and 
occupational infections. 
4. Ensure aseptic technique 
5. Meet surgical safety standards 
➢ Equipment 
• Package of proper-size sterile gloves (latex free if nurse or patient has 
sensitivity or allergy) 
• Sterile pack containing sterile gown. 
• Clean, flat, dry surface 
• Paper face masks, cap or hood, surgical shoe covers 
• Protective eyewear/face shield. 
 
Procedure 
Steps Rationale 
Before entering operating room or treatment 
area, apply cap, face mask, eyewear, and foot 
covers (paper or cloth covers fit over work 
shoes). 
To prevent hair and air droplet 
nuclei from contaminating 
sterile work areas. Eyewear 
protects mucous membranes of 
eye. Foot covers reduce 
contamination from 
shoes. 
Perform surgical hand scrub To remove transient and 
resident bacteria. 
Circulating nurse assists by opening sterile 
pack containing sterile gown (folded inside 
out). 
Outer s u r f a c e o f  gown 
r e m a i n s sterile. 
Reach down to sterile gown package; lift 
folded gown directly upward and step back 
away from table. 
Provides wide margin of 
safety, avoiding contamination 
of gown.

25 
  
Pick up the sterile gown at the inner neckline This preserves the sterility of 
outer gown surface. 
Hold the gown away from the body and 
other unsterile objects. 
 
Allow gown to unfold, keeping inside of 
gown toward body. Do not touch outside of 
gown with bare hands. 
Outside of gown is sterile 
surface 
With hands at shoulder level, slip both arms 
into armholes simultaneously. 
Ask circulating nurse to bring gown over your 
shoulders by reaching inside to arm seams and 
pulling gown on, leaving sleeves covering 
hands. 
Careful application prevents 
contamination. Gown covers   
hands to prepare for closed 
gloving 
 
Have circulating nurse securely tie back of gown 
at neck and waist. (If gown is wraparound style, 
do not touch sterile flap to cover it until you are 
gloved.) 
Gown must completely 
enclose underlying garments

26 
  
 
       Place arms in sleeves                                     Circulating nurse ties scrub gown 
 
With hands covered by gown sleeves, open 
inner sterile glove package 
Hands remain clean. Sterile 
gown cuff touches sterile glove 
surface

27 
  
Wearing gloves (closed method) 
With dominant hand inside gown cuff, pick up 
glove for non-dominant hand by grasping 
folded cuff 
Sterile gown touches sterile 
glove 
Extend non-dominant forearm with palm up 
and place palm of glove against palm of non-
dominant hand. Glove fingers point toward 
elbow 
Positions glove for application 
over cuffed hand, keeping glove 
sterile. 
Grasp back of glove cuff with covered 
dominant hand and turn glove cuff over end 
of non-dominant hand and gown cuff 
Seal created by glove cuff over 
gown prevents exit of 
microorganisms  over 
operative sterile field. 
Grasp top of glove and underlying gown 
sleeve with covered dominant hand. 
Carefully extend fingers into glove, being 
sure that glove cuff covers gown cuff 
 
Glove dominant hand in same manner, 
reversing hands. Use gloved non-dominant 
hand to pull on  glove. Keep hand inside sleeve 
Sterile touches sterile 
Be sure that fingers are fully extended into 
both 
gloves 
Ensures that nurse has full 
dexterity while using gloved 
hand 
 
Scrub nurse opens glove package. 
 
Glove is applied to left hand as 
right hand remains inside cuff 
Second glove is applied.

28 
  
  
For wraparound sterile gowns: take gloved 
hand and release fastener or ties in front of 
gown 
Front of gown is sterile 
Hand paper tab connected to sterile tie to 
circulating nurse, who is non-sterile. 
Circulating nurse stands still as you turn 
completely around to left, allowing for 
margin of safety as gown wraps around and 
covers your back .  Take back  sterile   
tie  from 
circulating nurse and secure tie to gown. 
 
Hand tie to sterile team member 
Contact with team member 
could contaminate gown and 
gloves. Gown must enclose 
undergarments

29 
  
 Surgical Asepsis  
 
➢ Definition of surgical asepsis 
 A practice designed to eliminate all microorganisms—including spores—from 
objects and areas, ensuring sterility during procedures that penetrate the skin or enter 
sterile body cavities. 
 
➢ Definition of aseptic technique 
- Aseptic technique is the technique used to avoid the introduction of 
pathogenic organisms into the body.  
 
➢ Purpose of aseptic technique 
- Protect the patient from contamination by pathogenic organisms during 
medical, surgical and nursing procedures. 
 
➢ Principles of aseptic techniques 
1. Perform surgical hand scrub before donning sterile gloves 
2. Personal protective equipment (PPE) must be worn correctly. This includes sterile 
gowns, gloves, masks, and hair covers to create a barrier against contamination.  
3. Know what is sterile:  
- Understand which items, areas, and instruments are sterile . 
- Sterile items must be handled only with sterile gloves or tools. 
4. Know What Is Not Sterile 
- Recognize non-sterile surfaces, items, and body parts . 
- Avoid contact between sterile and non-sterile objects. 
5. Before sterilization, equipment should be clean and free from contamination by 
dirt, dust or any discharge as sterilization is not replacing the cleansing of 
equipment. 
6. All equipment is obtained from a stockroom wash sterile package and placed on 
sterile table. If there is doubt about sterility of a certain object, consider it unsterile. 
7. Sterile equipment must be kept dry. Moisture is a good medium for transmission 
and growth of microorganisms. 
8. Minimize airborne contamination. Air currents enhance the transmission of 
infection SO 
- Limit movement around sterile fields .

30 
  
- Use masks and maintain proper ventilation in operating rooms . 
- Avoid coughing, sneezing or unnecessary talking near or over a sterile field  . 
9. If a sterile person must cough or sneeze, they should turn away from the field and 
cover nose and mouth  
10. Keep sterile field in sight and above waist: 
- Never turn your back on a sterile field . 
- Keep all sterile items above waist level and within visual field. 
11. Keep forceps blades in sight, above waist level and pointed downward. As it is the 
correct position of the blades, sterile items that are out of vision or below the waist 
level of the nurse are considered unsterile. 
12. The wrapper of a sterile pack must be opened away from the body, the distal flap 
first, the lateral flaps next and the proximal flap toward the body last, thus making 
it unnecessary to reach over the sterile field 
13. Reaching across a sterile field with bare hands or with other non-sterile items must 
be avoided. 
14. Fluids flow in the direction of gravity. Pouring sterile fluids must be done without 
splashing and in a way avoids the non-sterile lip of the bottle touching the sterile 
receiving container. 
15. Sterile surface that touches sterile surface remains sterile . 
16. Keep sterile and non-sterile items separate: 
- Maintain clear boundaries between sterile fields and contaminated areas . 
- Use barriers (e.g., drapes, gloves) to prevent cross-contamination. 
17. Sterile surface touching unsterile surface becomes contaminated. 
18. The edges of a sterile field are considered non-sterile. For most drapes and 
packaging, the outer 1-inch (2.5 cm) border is unsterile. 
19. Only sterile items are used within the sterile field . 
20. Sterile articles must be kept in sterile containers to keep them sterile. 
21. Dressings and supplies once removed from sterile containers may not go back into 
them even though they are unused because of possibility of air contamination . 
22. Educate and Communicate 
- Ensure all team members understand aseptic principles. 
- Speak up if a break in sterility occurs—safety comes first.

31 
  
Antiseptic Solutions 
➢ Difference between antiseptics, disinfectants, antibacterials and antibiotics 
❑ Antiseptics: are biocides or products that destroy or inhibit the growth of 
microorganisms including viruses and spores in or on living tissue (e.g. 
health care personnel hand washes and surgical scrubs) 
- They can kill or prevent the growth of viruses, bacteria, and fungi. 
- They’re frequently used in hospitals and other medical settings to reduce the 
risk of infection during surgery and other procedures. 
❑ Disinfectants: A chemical agent used to destroy, inactivate, or reduce the 
concentration of pathogenic microorganisms—such as bacteria, viruses, and 
fungi—on hard surfaces and in water, excluding bacterial spores in most 
cases 
❑ Antibacterial:  are effective in killing or slowing the growth of bacteria.  
- They do not kill or prevent viruses from growing. 
❑ Antibiotic: An antibiotic is an agent that either kills or inhibits the growth of 
a microorganism. 
N.B: All antibiotics are anti-bacterial but all anti-bacterial are not antibiotics. 
➢ Uses of antiseptics  
1. Hand hygiene:  chlorhexidine gluconate and povidone-iodine solutions are often 
used in hand scrubs and hand rubs and. Alcohol in concentrations 70% in 
hospitals. 
2. Pre-operative skin disinfection – antiseptics applied to the operation site to 
reduce the resident skin and prevent surgical site infections. 
3. Disinfection of mucous membrane– antiseptic irrigations may be instilled into 
the bladder, urethra or vagina before catheterization to treat infections or cleanse 
the cavity.  
4. Preventing and treating infected wounds and burns.  
5. Treating mouth and throat infections

32 
  
General Guidelines for using Antiseptic Solutions: 
1. Consider using a topical antiseptic solution to cleanse wounds presenting with signs 
and symptoms of local infection,  
2. Consider using topical antiseptic solutions as an adjunct to systemic antibiotics in 
patients who have signs of spreading wound infection. 
3. Do not use more than one topical antimicrobial or antiseptic product at a time. 
4. A topical antiseptic solution should be used for up to five days and for no longer 
than 14 days at the most. 
- After five days of use, the wound should be re-assessed for signs of 
improvement, such as a reduction in slough or odor, which would indicate a 
reduced bacterial burden.  
- Once the wound starts to improve, the antiseptic solution should continue to be 
applied for up to 14 days and then discontinue 
- If, after 14 days, the wound is found to have deteriorated or shows signs of 
spreading infection, use of systemic antibiotics should be considered. 
5. Once the wound has improved, stop using the antiseptic cleaning solution 
➢ The most common antiseptic solutions are:  
1) Betadine (povidone-iodine) 
Mechanism of action:  
- It kills bacteria spores, fungi, and viruses by penetrating microbial cell membranes 
and interacting with proteins, nucleotides, and fatty acids in the cytoplasm and 
cytoplasmic membrane. 
- This interaction ultimately results in rapid cell death. 
Indications: 
- Pre- and post-operative skin disinfection. 
- Used for cleaning closed wounds.

33 
  
- Used to treat infection in septic wounds e.g. decubitus ulcer. 
- Preparation of the skin and mucous membranes of injections, and aspiration needle 
biopsy. 
- Maintaining oral hygiene before, during and after dental or oral surgery. 
- Antiseptic treatment of inflammation of the vagina (non-specific or mixed). 
Side effects:  
- Many patients are allergic to iodine as it interferes with tissue granulation. 
- Neutropenia (low white blood cells). Excessive absorption of iodine can result in 
systemic effects such as metabolic acidosis (a metabolic disorder). 
- Hyperthyroidism (increased secretion of thyroid hormone) and hypothyroidism  
(decreased thyroid hormone). 
Different concentrations of Betadine: 
 
Concentration (0.5% povidone-
iodine) Oral 
Antiseptic 
(7.5% povidone-iodine) 
Surgical Scrub 
(Povidone-iodine, 10%) 
Antiseptic Solution 
Uses Oral rinse for the 
preparation of the oral 
mucosa prior to 
injection, dental surgery 
or tooth extraction 
 
Significantly reduces the 
number of 
microorganisms on the 
hands and forearms prior 
to surgery. 
• For preparation of 
skin prior to surgery 
• Help reduce bacteria 
on the skin that can 
potentially cause 
infection 
Figure

34 
  
2) Alcohol 
Available Concentrations: 
• Ethyl alcohol 70%. It is commonly used in the hospital 
• Isoprobyl alcohol 91%. 
Mechanism of action:  
• Alcohol works better at 50% to 80% concentration because it can go through 
dirt and body fluids more easily at that level. 
• Denatures proteins: Alcohol unfolds and inactivates microbial proteins, leading 
to cell death. 
• Disrupts membranes: It dissolves the lipid layer of cell membranes, causing 
leakage and destruction. 
• Inhibits enzymes: Stops essential microbial enzymes from functioning. 
• Water enhances effect: 60–90% alcohol solutions are most effective—water 
helps penetrate cells and denature proteins more efficiently 
Indications:  
• It is used to disinfect skin before a needle stick and before surgery. 
• Strong antiseptic solution used for closed stitched wounds. 
• Alcohol is used to clean the skin around a wound, but not inside the wound. If 
alcohol touches the open wound, it can cause irritation and make the bleeding 
worse. 
3) Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) 
Mechanism of action: 
- It liberates O2 which when it comes in contact with the tissue’s effervescence occurs 
and brings microorganisms to the surface.   
Indications: It is powerful antiseptic solution, used in septic and non-deep wounds that 
include necrotic dead tissues.

35 
  
Notes: 
• Effervescence should be removed at once. 
• After use should be washed by normal saline as mechanical wash. 
• When epithelial tissue begins to be formed, hydrogen peroxide is discontinued 
as it inhibits tissue formation.  
 
 
4) Chlorhexidine 
 
- Chlorhexidine: is a powerful antiseptic and disinfectant that is widely used in medical 
setting e.g. chlorhexidine gluconate 4%    
Mechanism of action:  
• Chlorhexidine kills by disrupting the cell membrane. 
• It has both bacteriostatic (inhibits bacterial growth) and bactericidal (kills 
bacteria). 
Indications:  
• Surgical hand scrub significantly reduces the number of microorganisms on the 
hands and forearms prior to surgery or patient care 
• Patient preoperative skin preparation 
• Skin superficial wound and general skin cleansing as it causes severe irritation 
in deep wounds. 
• Mouth wash products e.g. Listerine – Hexitol.

36 
  
 
 
5) Normal saline 0.9% (NaCl) 
Indications as antiseptic solution:  
• Using sterile saline water to irrigate wounds is one of the most common 
cleansing methods in hospitals. 
• Used as mechanical washing after another solution as H2O2. 
• It can be used to wet dressing if it adheres to the wound (softening of old 
dressing).   
 
6) Tincture of iodine 
Mechanism of action:  
- It kills microbes by breaking down their proteins and DNA. The alcohol helps iodine 
enter cells quickly and work fast. 
Indication: Used for closed wounds and minor abrasions.

37 
  
Contraindications:  
• Newborn infants. 
• Large open wounds. 
• Patients who are allergic to iodine products. 
Notes: 
• It contains 2% iodine in 7% alcoholic solution.  
• It should be fresh because old solution becomes concentrated sand can cause 
tissue damage.  
 
 
 
 
7) Glycerin magnesia 
 
- Available as aqueous solution and glycerine-based gel dressing (elasto gel) which is 
advanced wound dressing. 
Mechanism of action: It creates a hypertonic environment that draws water out of 
microbial cells, causing dehydration and cell death.  
Indication: Used for deep septic wound. 
Advantages:  
• Absorb the excessive exudates from the wound:  It can absorb 3–4 times its own 
weight of fluids.  
• The dressing will not dry out or allow the exudate to dry out, thus keeping the

38 
  
dressing from becoming bonded to the wound or the surrounding tissue. 
• It has been also proven to be bacteriostatic / fungi static. 
Note: It must be left without drying. 
 
8) Acetic acid 
 
- Acetic acid concentration is frequently used in wounds as a 0.25 % or 0.5% solution.  
Mechanism of action: It is bactericidal against many Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
organisms, especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa.  
Side effect: Acetic acid initially delayed re-epithelization HP 17 - Acetic acid is 
cytotoxic 
 
 
9) Mixture solution 
 
Composition: 60% normal saline + 30 % glycerin magnesium +10% acetic acid. 
Mechanism of action: Promote granulation 
Uses: Deep septic wound 
10) Aloe Vera Gel 
Mechanism of action:  
1. Aloe Vera Gel promotes wound healing by directly stimulating the activity of 
macrophages and fibroblasts. 
2. Anti-inflammatory 
Uses: effective against Salmonella and aerobic bacteria

39 
  
Preparing a sterile field 
 
➢ A sterile field provides a sterile surface for placement of sterile equipment. 
➢ Sterile drapes provide a work surface for placing sterile supplies and 
manipulating items with sterile gloves and establishing a  sterile field 
around a treatment site such as a  surgical incision, venipuncture site, or 
site for indwelling urinary catheter. 
➢ Surgical technicians may prepare a sterile field. All members of the 
surgical team are mindful to ensure that they all maintain a sterile field.   
Preparing dressing cart 
[ 
Clean the trolley using detergent agent 
according to local policy, start at the top 
of the dressing car and work down to the 
bottom of the dressing car using single 
strokes. 
To prevent the spread of microorganism 
Perform hand hygiene. To prevent the spread of microorganism 
Gathering and ordering necessary 
supplies & equipment 
• Tray  
• Normal saline0.9% 
• Betadine 10% (Check for the 
expiration date of solutions) 
• Adhesive Tape 
• Plastic bag 
• Rubber sheet 
• Gloves and mask 
• Materials for hand hygiene 
(liquid soap, paper hand towels 
and Alcohol hand-rub)  
• Personal protective equipment 
if needed 
To save time 
Prepare and check sterilization of the 
following packets 
• Sterile dressing packet.  
• Sterile artery forceps packet. 
• Sterile iodine ball packet 
To ensure the sterility of dressings, artery 
forces and solution is maintained

40 
  
•  Inspect the integrity of the sterile 
item.  
•  Check the expiration date of 
equipment.  
• Check the seal of packages. 
• Check sterile indicator 
 
Package preparation 
➢ Types of packages  
1. Minor package, package contains one artery forceps  
2. Major package, package contains two artery forceps or more  
3. Package for removal of suture, package contains one artery forceps & one scissor 
for removal of suture  
➢ Equipment:  
- Iodine bowel.  
- Number of dressings as needed  
- Number of gauzes. 
- Number of cotton sponges.  
- One artery forceps or tissue forceps in (minor package) and Two artery forceps in 
(major package), scissors for removal of suture if needed. 
-  Clean towel or drape.      
-  Adhesive tape. 
Procedure: 
Steps Rationale 
1 -Perform hand washing.  To prevent contamination  
 
2 -Prepare equipment  To save time and effort. 
 
3 - Place the towel or drape of package in the middle of 
clean table.  
a- Proximal flap.  
b- Right flap.   
c- Left flap.   
d- Distal flap.