Acute Viral Hepatitis
ILOs
By the end of lecture, the students should be aware about:
•Definition of acute viral hepatitis and epidemiology
•How do you test for and diagnose acute hepatitis?
•How to prevent and which vaccine is given for viral hepatitis?
•What is the best treatment for viral hepatitis? 
Definition: Acute hepatitis is a term used to describe a wide variety of conditions 
characterized by acute inflammation of the hepatic parenchyma or injury to 
hepatocytes resulting in elevated liver function indices. 
In general, hepatitis is classified as acute or chronic based on the duration of the 
inflammation and insult to the hepatic parenchyma. If the period of inflammation or 
hepatocellular injury lasts for less than six months, characterized by normalization of 
the liver function tests, it is called acute hepatitis. 
Epidemiology
Generally, the rates of viral hepatitis are low in high-income regions and high in 
resource-poor areas. The past five years have seen a small increase in cases mostly 
from isolated food-related outbreaks, persons who use drugs, and the homeless 
population. In high endemic areas, HAV has affected more than 90% of children by 
age 10. 
Causes of Acute Viral Hepatitis
Acute viral hepatitis can be caused by five major hepatotropic hepatitis viruses(A, 
B, C, D, E):

Symptoms of Acute Viral Hepatitis
•Acute viral hepatitis can cause anything from a minor flu-like illness to 
fatal liver failure . Sometimes there are no symptoms. The severity of 
symptoms and speed of recovery vary considerably, depending on the virus 
and the person's response to the infection. 
•Hepatitis A and C often cause very mild symptoms or none at all and may be 
unnoticed. Hepatitis B and E are more likely to produce severe symptoms. 
Symptoms of acute viral hepatitis usually begin suddenly. They include a 
poor appetite, malaise, nausea and vomiting, fever…etc.
•Sometimes, after 3 to 10 days, the urine becomes dark, and stool becomes 
pale. Jaundice (a yellowish discoloration of the skin and whites of the eyes) 
may develop. It is sometimes accompanied by itching. The liver may be 
enlarged and tender.
•Most of the initial symptoms usually disappear within a week, and people 
feel better even though the jaundice may worsen. 
•Rarely, fulminant hepatitis develops. Fulminant hepatitis is severe hepatitis 
with signs of liver failure . Fulminant hepatitis can occur in people with 
hepatitis A, but it is more likely to develop in people with hepatitis B, 
particularly if they also have hepatitis D. 
•People with acute viral hepatitis usually recover in 4 to 8 weeks, even 
without treatment. However, some people infected with hepatitis B or C 
develop chronic infections.
Diagnosis of Acute Viral Hepatitis
Blood tests
Liver tests involving measuring the levels of liver enzymes and other substances 
produced by the liver. These blood tests can detect parts of specific viruses or 
specific antibodies produced by the body to fight the viruses. Specific laboratory 
tests include:
 HAV:
▪HAV: IgM anti-HAV: positive at the time of onset of symptoms; results remain 
positive for 3-6 months after the primary infection
▪Anti-HAV IgG appears soon after IgM and generally persists for many years.
HBV:  
▪Serology: HBsAg, HBCc Ab IgM
▪HBV Viral DNA: Most accurate marker of viral DNA and detected by PCR 
HCV: 
▪HCV: Anti-HCV; cannot distinguish acute from chronic infection

▪PCR: used to detect viral RNA  HCV (the most accurate)
Hepatitis E: 
▪Anti-HEV antibodies:  IgM (acute), IgG (chronic)
▪Polymerase chain detection assay (PCR)
Prevention of Acute Viral Hepatitis
Because treatments for viral hepatitis are only partially effective, preventing viral 
hepatitis is very important. Prevention of Acute Viral Hepatitis include: Vaccines 
and immune globulin
1-Vaccines 
•Vaccines to prevent hepatitis A and hepatitis B are available. A vaccine for 
hepatitis E is currently available only in China. No vaccines against hepatitis 
C or D virus are available. However, vaccination against hepatitis B virus 
also reduces the risk of infection with hepatitis D virus. Hepatitis vaccines 
are given by injection into muscle.
•Routine vaccination with the hepatitis A vaccine and hepatitis B vaccine is 
recommended for all children and for adults at high risk of getting hepatitis.
•As with most vaccines, protection requires allowing several weeks for the 
vaccine to reach its full effect as the immune system gradually creates 
antibodies against the virus.
2-Immune globulin
If people who have not been vaccinated are exposed to hepatitis B virus, they are 
given hepatitis B immune globulin and are vaccinated. It is given by injection. 
Babies born to mothers with hepatitis B are given hepatitis B immune 
globulin (injected into a muscle) and hepatitis B vaccine.
Other preventive measures against infection with the hepatitis viruses can be 
taken:
▪Washing hands thoroughly before handling food
▪Not sharing needles to inject drugs
▪Not sharing toothbrushes, razors, or other items that could get blood on them
▪Practicing safe sex—for example, using barrier protection such as a condom, 
Limiting the number of sex partners
Donated blood is unlikely to be contaminated because it is screened. Nonetheless, 
doctors help to reduce the risk of hepatitis by ordering blood transfusions only when 
essential. Before surgery, people can also sometimes prevent the need for 
transfusion of blood from an unknown donor by donating their own blood weeks 
before the operation.
Treatment of Acute Viral Hepatitis

•Supportive care
For most people with acute viral hepatitis, special treatment is not necessary. 
However, people with severe acute hepatitis may require hospitalization so that 
symptoms can be treated. If doctors suspect that fulminant hepatitis is developing, 
the person is hospitalized so that mental status can be monitored, liver tests can be 
done, and doctors can determine whether liver transplantation is needed.
After the first several days, appetite usually returns, and people do not need to stay 
in bed. Severe restrictions of diet or activity are unnecessary, and vitamin 
supplements are not required. Most people can safely return to work after the 
jaundice clears, even if their liver test results are not quite normal.
People with hepatitis should not drink alcohol until they have fully recovered.
The infected liver may not process (metabolize) drugs normally. So a doctor may 
need to stop a drug or reduce the dosage of a drug that could accumulate to harmful 
levels in the body (such as warfarin or theophylline). Thus, people with hepatitis 
should tell their doctor all the drugs they are taking (both prescription and 
nonprescription, including any medicinal herbs), so that the dosage of the drug can 
be adjusted if necessary.
If itching occurs, cholestyramine, taken by mouth, is often effective.
If hepatitis B causes fulminant hepatitis, people are usually treated in an intensive 
care unit. Antiviral drugs may help. However, liver transplantation is the most 
effective treatment and is the best hope of survival, particularly for adults.
Questions:
What is definition of acute viral hepatitis?
How do you test for and diagnose acute hepatitis?
How to prevent and which vaccine is given for viral hepatitis?
What is the treatment for viral hepatitis? 
What are the sequlae of acute viral hepatitis?