Chronic liver disease 
Definition: Chronic liver disease (CLD) refers to a long -term 
pathological process of continuous destruction of liver parenchyma 
for more than six months  and its gradual su bstitution with fibrous 
tissue, and characterized by decreased hepatic function s that 
include the production of clotting factors and other proteins, 
detoxification of harmful products of metabolism, and excretion of 
bile.  
Continuous process of inflammation, destruction, and regeneration 
of liver parenchyma is leading to fibrosis and then cirrhosis which 
is a final stage of chronic liver disease that results in disruption of 
liver architecture, the formation of widespread nodules, vascular 
reorganization, neo -angiogenesis, and deposition of an 
extracellular matrix.  
Etiology 
The spectrum of etiologies is broad for chronic liver disease, which 
includes toxins, alcohol abuse for a prolonged time, drugs, 
infection, autoimmune diseases, genetic and metabolic disorders.  
Chronic liver disease is an extremely common clinical condition, 
and the focus is done on the common etiologies, clinical 
manifestations, and management. 
The following are the most common etiologies: 
Alcoholic Liver Disease s : I ncludes alcoholic fatty liver with or 
without hepatitis, alcohol hepatitis (reversible because of acute 
ingestion) to cirrhosis (irreversible).

Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD/NASH) : Usually has 
an association with metabolic syndrome (obesity, hyperlipidemia, 
and diabetes mellitus). Some of these patients develop non -
alcoholic steatohepatitis, which leads to fibrosis of the liver. All the 
risk factors of metabolic syndrome can aggravate the disease 
process. 
Chronic Viral Hepatitis : Chronic hepatitis C, B and D infections 
are common causes of chronic liver disease . There are various 
genotypes of hepatitis C. In Europe and North America, genotype 
1a and 1b are more prevalent, while in Southeast Asia, genotype 3 
is more common. A molecular epidemiological study revealed a 
high prevalence of HCV genotype 4, subtype 4a among Egyptian 
patients living in Sharkia governorate, Egypt. Chronic hepatitis C, if 
not treated, may lead to hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Genetic Causes 
• Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency:  This is a common genetic 
cause of CLD among children. 
• Hereditary hemochromatosis: It is an autosomal recessive 
disorder of iron absorption  due to a mutation of the HFE 
gene that regulates the iron absorption from the intestine, 
excessive iron is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract  
resulting in a pathological increase in total body iron (such as 
ferritin). This is leading to more generation of hydroxyl free 
radicals, which in turn causes organ fibrosis. 
Wilson disease:  Autosomal recessive disorder due to 
deficiency of ceruloplasmin (copper carring protein)  
leading to excessive amounts of copper accumulat ion in the

body, especially in the brain,  liver and eyes. The signs and 
symptoms of Wilson disease usually include a combination of 
liver disease, neurological and psychiatric problems.  
Nervous system or psychiatric problems are often the initial 
features with  clumsiness, tremors, difficulty walking, speech 
problems, impaired thinking ability,  mood disturbance as 
depression and anxiety. 
The signs and symptoms of liver disease include jaundice, 
fatigue, loss of appetite, and may be ascites.  
Copper deposits in the cornea forming a ring , called Kayser -
Fleischer ring. 
Autoimmune Causes 
Autoimmune hepatitis is a rare disease in which there is the 
destruction of liver parenchyma by autoantibodies. Most of the 
patients who present with this disease have already developed 
cirrhosis. Females are more commonly affected than males. 
• Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC):  This is an autoimmune 
and progressive disease of the liver, which is the destruction 
of intrahepatic biliary channels and portal inflammation and 
scarring. It leads to cholestatic jaundice and fibrosis of liver 
parenchyma. PBC is more common in middle -aged women. 
Alkaline phosphatase levels increase in PBC. 
• Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC):  commonly 
associated with ulcerative colitis. This condition is 
characterized by a decrease in the size of intrahepatic and 
extrahepatic bile ducts due to inflammation and fibrosis.

• Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH):  This is a form of chronic 
inflammatory hepatitis, more common in women than men, 
and is characterized by elevated autoantibodies such as 
antinuclear antibodies, anti -smooth muscle antibodies, and 
hypergammaglobulinemia.  
Other Causes of Chronic Liver Disease 
• Drugs - amiodarone, isoniazid, methotrexate, phenytoin, 
nitrofurantoin. 
• Vascular. Budd-Chiari syndrome. 
• Idiopathic/cryptogenic, around 15% 
Epidemiology 
Chronic liver disease is one of the frequent causes of death, 
especially in the developing world. The increasing prevalence of 
chronic liver disease has been noted in recent times. The majority 
of chronic liver diseases in the developed world include alcoholic 
liver disease, chronic viral hepatitis, including hepatitis B and C, 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), and hemochromatosis.  
Pathophysiology 
Hepatic fibrosis is the deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) in 
response to chronic liver injury by any etiology. 
The underlying mechanism of fibrosis and cirrhosis at a cellular 
level is the recruitment of stellate cells and fibroblasts that cause 
fibrosis, while parenchymal regeneration relies on hepatic stem 
cells.

The common pathway is initiated by hepatic stellate cells (HSC), 
which usually are vitamin A storing dormant cells found in space 
between sinusoids and hepatocytes. In response to chronic liver 
injury, HSC gets activated into proliferative fibrogenic 
myofibroblast and upregulates the expression of inflammatory 
receptors such as chemokine receptors, ICAM -1, and other 
inflammatory mediators by releasing chemokines and other 
leukocyte chemoattractants. This pro -inflammatory phase or 
initiation phase also changes gene and phenotypic expression of 
the liver cells, making them more responsive to these inflammatory 
cytokines, and perpetuation of activated HSC cells result ing in 
accumulation of ECM and progressive fibrosis. 
This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of chronic liver 
disease and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating 
and treating patients with this condition. 
Clinical Manifestations 
Signs and symptoms of CLD can be nonspecific, such as fatigue, 
anorexia, weight loss, or depend upon the complication that the 
patient has developed. 
Signs and symptoms of significant complications a s portal 
hypertension (esophageal varices, ascites), hepatocellular 
insufficiency (e.g., jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy), and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Decompensated chronic liver disease 
can present with one of the following complications. 
(A) Portal Hypertension : PH is a result of resistance to portal 
blood flow because of cirrhotic and noncirrhotic etiology.  A portal 
venous pressure above 7  mmHg is considered portal

hypertension; however, clinical features or complications do not 
develop until portal pressure is higher than 12 mmHg. Portal 
hypertension causes can divide into prehepatic (e.g., portal vein 
thrombosis), hepatic (e.g., cirrhosis), and post hepatic (e.g., Budd 
Chiari syndrome). Cirrhosis and hepatic schistosomiasis remain 
the most common cause of portal hypertension . The following are 
the consequences of long-standing portal hypertension. 
• Esophageal or gastric  varices: It presents with melena or 
upper GI bleed ing and is  the most common life -threatening 
complication of CLD. 
• Caput medusa or rectal hemorrhoids 
• Ascites: It is an accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity 
because of raised portal pressure (increased hydrostatic 
pressure), decreased albumin (reduced oncotic pressure), 
and splanchnic vasodilation (due to the release of nitric 
oxide). Most of the patients develop ascites in the later 
stages of cirrhosis. Clinical findings in such patients are 
abdominal distension, shifting dullness, and a fluid wave. 
Tense ascites can lead to shortness of breath or early 
satiety. 
 (B) Hepatic Encephalopathy: 
This is a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by hepatic dysfunction 
due to failure of d etoxification of harmful products of metabolism, 
e.g., ammonia  leading to an i ncreased level of ammonia, which 
impair consciousness.   
There are different grades of hepatic encephalopathy.

• Grade 0/Minimal : Subclinical, normal mental status with 
minimal changes in memory, coordination, intellectual 
function, concentration. 
• Grade 1:  Trivial lack of awareness, euphoria or anxiety, 
shortened attention span, impairment of addition or 
subtraction, altered sleep rhythm. 
• Grade 2:  Lethargy or apathy, disorientation to time, 
personality change, inappropriate behavior, dyspraxia, 
asterixis. 
• Grade 3: Somnolence to semi -stupor, responsive to stimuli, 
confused, gross disorientation, bizarre behavior. 
• Grade 4: Coma 
(C) Jaundice 
Jaundice is clinically visible when total bilirubin is greater than 2 
mg/dl. As in chronic liver disease, there is the destruction of liver 
parenchyma, and it does not conjugate bilirubin, which deposits in 
various tissues of the body. There is pruritus because of the 
accumulation of bile salts. 
(D) Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP) 
It is one of the acute and painful complications of chronic liver 
disease. Bacteria ( E. coli, Klebsiella, Streptococcus pneumonia ) 
seep through the gastrointestinal tract and infect the ascitic fluid. 
The infection spread through the fluid to the peritoneal membrane, 
causing inflammation. SBP presents with fever, generalized 
abdominal pain, tenderness, and absent bowel sounds.

( E) Hyperestrinism 
In chronic liver disease, the catabolism of estrogen becomes 
impaired, resulting in excess estrogen in the body. This manifests 
as palmar erythema, spider angiomas (dilated cutaneous arterioles 
with a central red spot and red extensions that radiate outward like 
a spider's web in the territory of SVC), gynecomastia (enlarged 
tender subareolar tissue), and testicular atrophy. 
( F) Hepatorenal Syndrome (HRS) 
Hepatorenal syndrome is a functional renal failure as kidneys are 
normal, where there is a gradual loss of renal function. It is a 
diagnosis of exclusion. Vasoconstrictors are released in CLD, 
which is responsible for the narrowing of renal vessels. The 
following criteria have been described: 
• Chronic liver disease with portal hypertension or advanced 
liver failure 
• Continuous rising in creatinine, usually more than 0.3 mg/dl 
within 48 hours or doubling from baseline within seven days.  
• Oliguria with the absence  or minimal proteinuria 
• Urine sodium less than 10 meq/L 
• Failure to improve with volume expansion and stopping the 
diuretics. 
• Absence of shock 
• No recent use of the nephrotoxic drug 
• Absence of renal parenchymal disease

( G) Coagulopathy 
The liver produces clotting factors, so the patients with CLD have 
coagulopathies and manifest or contribute to easy bruising and 
bleeding per gastrointestinal tracts. Hence, PT/INR (intrinsic 
pathway) and APTT (extrinsic pathways) are prolonged. 
Diagnosis: 
The diagnosis of chronic liver disease depends upon the etiology 
and complications of the disease. An outline regarding the 
diagnosis for various CLD appears below. 
• Viral hepatitis B , D  and C: Serology, PCR (quantitative or 
qualitative) with genotype 
• Alcoholic liver disease: Elevated levels of AST>ALT with a 
history of chronic alcohol intake. Usually, AST: ALT ratio is 2 
to 1 in alcoholic liver disease. 
• Hemochromatosis: Raised serum iron, ferritin, decreased 
TIBC, and liver biopsy. Genetic testing can detect a mutation 
in the HFE gene, especially C282Y. 
• Wilson disease: Raised urine copper, decreased serum 
ceruloplasmin, and liver biopsy. Genetic testing for the 
ATP7B gene. 
• Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: Diagnosis of exclusion and 
ALT>AST. Ultrasonography of the liver is informative.  
• Autoimmune hepatitis: Raised ANA, ASMA, and LKM-1 
• Alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency: Decreased levels of alpha one 
antitrypsin

• Primary biliary cirrhosis: Markedly raised alkaline 
phosphatase levels with an antimitochondrial antibody 
• Budd-Chiari and veno -occlusive disease: CBC, clotting 
profile, and imaging studies like ultrasound doppler or 
computed tomography with contrast study 
 Laboratory Findings 
In chronic liver disease, there is inflammation and destruction of 
hepatocytes that leads to the release of alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT)and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) . but normal levels of 
these markers do not rule out cirrhosis.  As in compensated CLD 
LFTs may be normal in cirrhosis. 
Other parameters (ALP and GGT) of LFTs also appear elevated in 
cholestatic conditions like PBC. Bilirubin (unconjugated> 
conjugated) levels are elevated in jaundice. There is reduced 
production of clotting factors leading to raised PT/INR and APTT. 
Because of hepatocellular insufficiency in cirrhosis, albumin level 
drops, and ammonia raises, causing ascites and hepatic 
encephalopathy. 
 In the case of ascites, diagnostic paracentesis is an investigation 
of choice to see whether ascites are because of raised portal 
pressure or another cause.  
Radiologic Investigations 
• Ultrasound abdomen   to detects the size, echogenicity 
nodularity of the liver, ther eby diagnosing liver cirrhosis, 
measurement of portal vein diameter which increases in

portal HTN and assessment of a clot in the hepatic vein 
(Budd-Chari) and portal vein in portal vein thrombosis. 
• Triphasic CT  scan can show a lesion in the liver or 
obstruction of biliary channels in a more precise w ay and is 
the test of choice in diagnosing hepatocellular carcinoma.  
• Transient elastography  (TE) detects early stages of 
cirrhosis. It can also detect cardiovascular damage in 
patients with NAFLD.  
• Wedge hepatic venous pressure  measures portal venous 
pressure in CLD. 
• Doppler scan can help in diagnosing Budd-Chiari and portal 
vein thrombosis. 
• EEG shows delta waves in hepatic encephalopathy. 
• An upper endoscopy  can diagnose and treat esophageal 
varices.  
• Liver biopsy  can confirm the diagnosis of chronic liver 
disease.  
There are various scoring systems used to assess the severity of 
chronic liver disease. 
1. The Child-Pugh score uses ascites, bilirubin, albumin, PT, and 
encephalopathy. 
• Class A (score 5-6): well-compensated disease. 
• Class B (score 7-9): functional compromise. 
• Class C (score 10-15): decompensated disease.

2. MELD (model of end -stage liver disease) uses bilirubin, serum 
creatinine, and INR. The MELD score was initially used to predict 
mortality within three months after the TIPS procedure and now 
used to prioritize patients for receipt of a liver transplant. 
Complications of chronic liver disease: 
• Variceal bleeding 
• Ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) 
• Hepatic encephalopathy 
• Hepatorenal syndrome 
• Hepatopulmonary syndrome 
• Hepatocellular carcinoma 
 
Prophylaxis: Recommendations for Preventive Care are:- 
• Avoid various types of alcohol. 
• Regular screening for hepatitis B and hepatitis C 
• Vaccination against hepatitis A and B 
• Avoid iron supplementation unless there is an iron 
deficiency. 
• Avoid hepatotoxic drugs. 
• Maintain a good lipid profile to avoid metabolic syndrome 
and NAFLD.

• To prevent complications, patients with chronic liver disease 
will need surveillance. These patients should undergo routine 
monitoring of their CBC  and prothrombin time at least 3 to 4 
times per year. 
• Routine diagnostic endoscopy should be performed for 
asymptomatic esophageal varices, and a follow -up 
endoscopy should be done in 2 years if varices are not 
present. Treatment with a nonselective beta -blocker to 
reduce heart rate by 25% in patients with esophageal 
varices, offers primary prophylaxis with variceal 
bleeding. Patients with large esophageal varices should have 
prophylactic endoscopic variceal banding to avoid the risk of 
rupture and bleeding. 
• Surveillance of patients with cirrhosis  for HCC  with 
ultrasonography every six months.  A triphasic CT scan or a  
dynamic  MRI scan should be done to rule out hepatocellular 
carcinoma in patients with a liver nodule on the ultrasound. 
Treatment: 
General treatment: 
The treatment goal is to stop the progression of the disease and 
complications and treating the  underlying cause, Portal 
hypertension management, and specific treatments for individual 
disease.  
Esophageal varices related bleeding treatment includes 
aggressive fluid resuscitation, vasopressors (octreotide, 
terlipressin), and endoscopy. Endoscopic band ligation and

injection sclerotherapy are the usual modalities to treat variceal 
bleed in an emergency. In some patients, early transjugular 
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) can increase the survival 
rate. Propranolol is used for primary and secondary prophylaxis for 
esophageal varices.  
Ascites: Diuretics (furosemide, spironolactone) and sodium 
restriction are essential treatment options for ascites. For tense 
ascites, therapeutic paracentesis is done. Albumin infusion can 
also be considered. Initially,  
SBP: broad-spectrum antibiotics are the treatment of choice for 
SBP and then specific antibiotics after culture.  
Hepatic encephalopathy - The basic principle of treatment is to 
address the precipitating factors. Patients with hepatic 
encephalopathy usually improve with precipitating cause correction 
along with rifaximin and lactulose.  Lactulose acts by converting 
ammonia to ammonium ions and decreases its absorption from the 
gastrointestinal tract. Lactulose also relieves constipation through 
its osmotic effect, which further helps to ease the symptoms of 
hepatic encephalopathy. Rifaximin is used to decrease ammonia 
production by gut flora.  
Hepatorenal syndrome based on severity is divided into two 
categories. HRS 1 is more severe compared to HRS 2 (less 
severe). The primary goal is to correct underlying cause correction 
to reverse acute kidney injury. Treatment modalities depend on the 
severity and location of the patient. Treatment modalities include 
norepinephrine or terlipressin with albumin infusion or midodrine, 
octreotide with albumin infusion. TIPS procedure in some patients

can help and liver transplantation the only definite treatment in the 
patient who fails to respond to all other treatments.    
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) - Treatment is based on the 
Barcelona clinic liver cancer staging system in the management of 
HCC: 
• Initial stage (single HCC lesion): Transplantation, surgical  
resection and radiofrequency or microwave ablation. 
• Intermediate stage: Transarterial chemoembolization and 
radio-embolization. 
• Metastatic disease: Sorafenib 
Specific Treatment 
Viral Hepatitis 
• Continuous viral suppression with nucleoside and nucleotide 
analogs  
• Direct-acting antivirals achieving HCV eradication  
Alcoholic liver disease: Alcohol abstinence 
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease:  Treatment of metabolic 
syndrome components 
Autoimmune hepatitis:  Corticosteroids and other 
immunosuppressive drugs 
Hereditary hemochromatosis: Phlebotomy, iron-chelators  
Copper overload (Wilson disease): Copper chelators  
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency: Transplant

Drugs and toxins: Identify and stop the factor 
Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC): Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) 
Primary sclerosing cholangitis: Transplant 
Budd-Chiari syndrome:  Anticoagulation, thrombolysis or 
angioplasty with or without stenting, TIPS, or liver transplant 
Prognosis 
Compensated chronic liver disease (who has not developed 
significant complications) usually carries a better prognosis than 
decompensated liver cirrhosis.  
Decompensated liver cirrhosis patients (who have developed 
variceal bleeding, ascites, HCC, SBP, and hepatorenal syndrome) 
have a poor prognosis. Mean survival of about six months if Child -
Pugh score of 12 or greater or MELD score of 21 or higher.