Peptic ulcer disease 
Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) remain the most common cause 
of upper gastrointestinal bleeding worldwide  
Definition: 
Peptic ulcer can be defined as discontinuity in the mucosa 
that extend through the muscularis mucosa.  
Sites: 
◼ Duodenum [especially proximal part] 
◼ Stomach [especially lesser curvature] 
◼ Jejunum [after gastrojejunostomy or in Z.E syndrome] 
◼ Meckel's diverticulum [contain ectopic gastric mucosa] 
 Pathophysiology: 
Epithelial cells of the stomach and duodenum secrete mucus 
in response to irritation of the epithelial lining and as a result of 
cholinergic stimulation. The superficial portion of the gastric and 
duodenal mucosa exists in the form of a gel layer, which is 
impermeable to acid and pepsin.  
Other gastric and duodenal cells secrete bicarbonate, which 
aids in buffering acid that lies near the mucosa.  
Prostaglandins  have an important protective role as PGI2 
inhibits gastric acid secretions while PGE2 & PGF2 alpha increase 
synthesis of protective mucous layer and increase the production 
of bicarbonate.

Under normal conditions, a physiologic balance exists 
between gastric acid secretion and gastro-duodenal mucosal 
defense. Mucosal injury and, thus, PU occurs when the balance 
between the aggressive factors and the defensive mechanisms is 
disrupted.  
Aggressive factors, such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), H pylori infection, alcohol, bile salts, acid, and 
pepsin, can alter the mucosal defense by allowing back diffusion of 
hydrogen ions and subsequent epithelial cell injury.  
Defensive mechanisms include tight intercellular junctions, 
mucus, bicarbonate, mucosal blood flow, cellular restitution, and 
epithelial renewal . 
Etiology:  
Peptic ulcer disease may be due to any of the following: 
◼ Infection with a spiral gram -ve bacterium called  Helicobacter 
(HB) pylori  . 
◼ Long-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
NSAID is the second most common cause of peptic ulcers.  
Normally:  PGI2 inhibits gastric acid secretions while PGE2 
&PGF2 alpha increase synthesis of protective mucous. 
The NSAIDs prevent formation of these prostanoids leading 
to increase formation of gastric acid secretion and decrease 
mucous production 
◼ Hyper secretory states as Z.E. syndrome which are tumors in 
the pancreas and duodenum that produce gastrin hormone

that stimulates gastric acid production. Diarrhea may 
precede ulcer formation 
Risk factors: 
• Genetic factors may predispose to developing an ulcer. More 
than 20% of patients have a family history of peptic  ulcers.  
• Chronic pain, from any cause such as arthritis, fibromyalgia, 
repetitive stress injuries or persistent back pain, leading to 
ongoing use of NSAIDs,  
• Diabetes may increase risk of having H. B. pylori  infection, 
living in crowded, unsanitary conditions increases the risk of 
H. pylori infection. 
• Increasing age and lifestyle factors, including alcohol abuse, 
chronic stress, coffee drinking and smoking, may make 
patient more susceptible. 
•  Stressful conditions that may cause peptic ulcer disease 
include burns, central nervous system (CNS) trauma and 
surgery.  
• Severe medical illness as hepatic cirrhosis, Uremia, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, allergic gastritis and 
eosinophilic gastritis, Graft versus host disease, Henoch-
Schönlein gastritis, Celiac disease, Autoimmune disease, 
Other granulomatous gastritides (eg, sarcoidosis, 
histiocytosis X).

•  Infections, including tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-
Barr virus, HIV, herpes simplex, influenza, syphilis, Candida 
albicans, histoplasmosis and mucomycosis.  
• Chemotherapeutic agents, such as 5-fluorouracil, 
methotrexate and cyclophosphamide. 
Prognosis and Complications:   
With proper treatment, most ulcers heal within 6 to 8 weeks. 
However, they may recur, particularly if H. pylori is not treated 
sufficiently and complications may include the following:- 
1. Perforation (rupture) of either the stomach or the duodenum 
leading to peritonitis. 
2. Bleeding  as haematemesis (vomiting of blood) or melena 
(black stool due to presence of digested blood) occurs in up 
to 15% of people with peptic ulcers.  
3. Bowel obstruction tends to happen where the stomach meets 
the small intestines. If there is an ulcer at this junction, 
swelling can occur, blocking the passage of food products 
through the gastrointestinal tract.  
Diagnosis: 
History:  First, take a detailed history of symptoms and risk 
factors, including:-  
◼ For how long symptoms like indigestion and pain have been 
present, how strong these sensations are.  
◼ If patient has lost any weight recently.

◼  What medications he has been taking. 
◼  His smoking and drinking habits. 
◼ If anyone in his family has had ulcers. 
◼ History of epigastric pain (the most common symptom ( 
burning sensation). Patient awakens with pain at night, may 
radiate to the back, nausea and vomiting, which might be 
related to partial or complete gastric outlet obstruction.  
Hematemesis or melena resulting from gastrointestinal 
bleeding. Symptoms consistent with anemia (fatigue, 
dyspnea, palpitation,……etc) may be present. 
Investigations:  The 2017 American College of Gastroenterology 
(ACG) guidelines for the treatment of H pylori infection (HPI) 
include the following recommendations for testing for H pylori: 
• All patients with active or past history of peptic ulcer disease 
(unless previous cure of HPI has been documented). 
•  low-grade gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT) lymphoma, or a history of endoscopic resection of 
early gastric cancer.  
• Patients with dyspepsia who are undergoing upper 
endoscopy (gastric biopsy specimens). 
• Patients on long-term, low-dose aspirin. 
• Patients initiating long-term therapy with no steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents.

• Patients with unexplained iron deficiency anemia following 
standard workup. 
• Adults with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
Investigations of Helico Bacter Pylori organism: 
I - Nonendoscopic or noninvasive tests include  
• Antibodies (immunoglobulin G [IgG]) to H pylori can be 
measured in serum (less sensitive). 
• Urea breath tests detect active H pylori infection by 
testing for the enzymatic activity of bacterial urease. 
• Fecal antigen testing identifies active H pylori infection 
by detecting the presence of H pylori antigens in stools. 
(This test is more accurate than antibody testing and is 
less expensive than urea breath tests). 
II - Endoscopic or invasive tests include:-  
• Rapid urease test is considered the endoscopic 
diagnostic test of choice and can be done in the 
endoscopy scene by HB pylori kits. The presence of H 
pylori in gastric mucosal biopsy specimens is detected 
by testing for the bacterial product urease. If H pylori is 
present, bacterial urease converts urea to ammonia, 
which changes pH and produces a color change in the 
kits. 
• Obtain histopathology  to establish the diagnosis of H 
pylori infection. ( if the rapid urease test result is

negative and a high suspicion for H pylori persists as 
presence of a duodenal ulcer ).  
III - Special studies 
Fasting serum gastrin level if suspect Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome  as when:  
• Patients with multiple ulcers; ulcers occurring distal to 
the duodenal bulb; strong family history of PUD.  
• Peptic ulcer associated with diarrhea, steatorrhea, or 
weight loss; peptic ulcer not associated with H pylori 
infection or NSAIDs.  
• Peptic ulcer associated with hypercalcemia or renal 
stones. 
•  Ulcers refractory to medical therapy.  
Treatment:-  
Preventive Care: 
• Preventing NSAID-related ulcers involves finding less 
harmful medications or alternative approaches to relieve 
pain, for example, COX-2 inhibitors or acetaminophen 
instead.  
• If patient has to take NSAIDs for a long time, we may 
consider prescribing a medication to try to prevent the 
development of ulcers like misoprostol, and H2 blocker (such 
as famotidine, nizatidine, or ranitidine), or a proton pump

inhibitor (PPI) such as omeprazole, lansoprazole, or 
rabeprazole….etc.  
• There are also certain lifestyle measures that may make him 
less prone to get an ulcer from either NSAIDs or H. pylori . 
• It is recommended to eat bland foods with milk and only 
small amounts of food with each meal. Dietary and other 
lifestyle measures that should help, however, include:  
• Eat a diet rich in fiber, especially from fruits and vegetables; 
this may reduce the risk of developing an ulcer in the first 
place and may speed the recovery. Vitamin A may be an 
added benefit from these foods.  
• Quit smoking.  
• Cut down on coffee as well as alcoholic or carbonated 
beverages. 
• Reduce stress with regular use of relaxation techniques such 
as yoga or meditation. 
( NB ) Active ulcers associated with NSAID use are treated with an 
appropriate course of PPI therapy and the cessation of  NSAIDs. 
For patients with a known history of ulcer, and in whom NSAID use 
is unavoidable, the lowest possible dose and duration of the 
NSAID and co-therapy with a PPI or misoprostol are 
recommended. 
Medical care: 
The 2017 ACG guidelines also recommend post treatment 
testing to prove eradication of HPI with the use of a urea breath

test, fecal antigen test, or biopsy-based testing at least 4 weeks 
following completion of antimicrobial therapy and after proton 
pump inhibitors have been withheld for 1-2 weeks. 
Treat all patients with peptic ulcers and associated H pylori 
infection with proton pump inhibitor-based triple or quadruple 
therapy.  
◼ PPI-based triple therapies for H pylori are considered the 
first-line therapies for the treatment of H pylori with a cure 
rate of 85-90%.  These regimens consist of a PPI, 
amoxicillin, and clarithromycin for 2 weeks.  
◼ Amoxicillin should be substituted by tinidazol or 
metronidazole in penicillin-allergic patients.  
◼ In the setting of active ulcers caused by H pylori, treatment 
with a PPI beyond the 2 weeks course of antibiotics and until 
the confirmation of ulcer healing.  
Triple therapies consist of 2 weeks treatment with the following: 
◼ Omeprazole Pantoprazole Rabeprazole Plus: Clarithromycin 
and Amoxicillin. 
◼ The alternative combination therapy consists of the following 
treatments administered for 14 days: 
◼ Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) Plus: Clarithromycin and 
Tinidazol or Metronidazole. 
Quadruple therapies for H pylori infection are generally reserved 
for patients who have failed a course of treatment and are

administered for 14 days. The treatment includes the following 
drugs : 
    PPIs Plus Tetracycline,  Metronidazole and Bismuth which 
coats and soothes the stomach, protecting it from the damaging 
effects of acid. 
Drugs are used for symptoms due to ulcers of any cause:  
• Antacids, may relieve heartburn or indigestion but will not 
treat an ulcer  
• H2 blockers, such as cimetidine, ranitidine, nizatidine, and 
famotidine, reduce gastric acid secretion.  
• Sucralfate makes a coating over the ulcer crater, protecting it 
from further damage  
• (N.B.) Misoprostol – can be used preventively if patient take 
a lot of NSAIDs because it helps to protect the stomach from 
the damaging effects of NSAIDs.  
Endoscopic therapy: 
With advances in endoscopic management, the need for surgery in 
bleeding peptic ulcers has significantly decreased. Recent 
developments in endoscopic therapy have aimed to further 
improve the clinical outcomes of patients with bleeding peptic 
ulcers  
Arterial Embolization: 
 Transcatheter arterial embolization is a feasible method for the 
treatment of rebleeding in gastroduodenal ulcer after endoscopic

treatment, resulting in high rates of technical and clinical success 
and low complication rates. 
Surgical Care: 
◼ With the success of medical and endoscopic therapy, 
surgery has a very limited role in the management of PUD.  
◼ Potential indications for surgery include:   
• Perforation usually is managed emergently with 
surgical repair. However, this is not mandatory for all 
patients.  
• Obstruction can complicate PUD, particularly if PUD is 
refractory to aggressive anti-secretory therapy, H pylori 
eradication, or avoidance of NSAIDs. Obstruction may 
persist or recur despite endoscopic balloon dilation.  
• Bleeding can complicate PUD, particularly in patients 
with massive hemorrhage and hemodynamic instability, 
recurrent bleeding on medical therapy, and failure of 
therapeutic endoscopy to control bleeding.