Dr. Ahmed Salah Abou 
Taleb
Faculty of Engineering 
-
 
Fayoum University
Technical Writing
Lecture (
2
)
Technical
Writing
By
1
st
 
Semester
2025 
-
 
2026
1

2
Course Reference:
Johnson-Sheehan, R., “Technical Communication Strategies for 
Today”, 2nd ed., Pearson, 2014.

3
Definition/Purpose of Course?
 Technical communication is the “art and science of making 
complex technical information accessible, usable, and relevant 
to a variety of audiences in a variety of settings.”
 Composition of the types of documents technical professionals 
write.
 Review of the planning, drafting, and editing processes.
 Interaction with new technologies and new environments..

4
Accessibility
 Accuracy– no errors of fact or grammar.
 Clarity– no ambiguity.
 Completeness– all necessary information is present.
 Diction—appropriate and grammatically correct language.
 Organization—logical arrangement of parts.
 Visual effectiveness– page/screen design, graphics..

5
Usability
 Allows audience to perform the task or retrieve the information 
they need.
 Studies design of table of contents, index, headings, etc.
 Keeps learning curve short..

6
Relevance
 Focus on your audience’s need for information.
 Give only what’s needed.
 Use language that fits your audience and situation and is 
consistent..

7
On-the-job Writing
 Communicate expertise to clients, customers, and the public.
 Report tech activities to supervisors and others.
 Write proposals.
 Instruct lay people.
 Correspond with colleagues and clients..

8
Tech Communicator’s Skills
 Facility with language.
 Use of critical thinking skills to solve problems.
 Ability to assess situations, determine what the most important 
issues  and the subsidiary ones.
 Ability to organize a document that presents the information 
clearly.
 Awareness of the persuasive nature of writing.
 Ability to compose  documents that convince your reader(s) to 
act as you suggest or to trust your point of view.
 Ethical behavior shown by avoiding deceptive graphics, 
presenting information truthfully, 
 Balancing ethical and moral beliefs with the demands of the job..

9
Communicating in the 
Technical Workplace

10
What is Technical Writing?
It is written communication for engineer, scientist, doctor, nurse, 
psychologist, social worker, anthropologist, architect, technical writer, 
or any other professional in a technical field to deliver information 
with the intent of achieving a desired purpose.
Sender
(Writer)
Receiver
(Reader)
Message
Written Text
Communication

11
Genre and the Technical Writing Process
Genres: 
 Relatively stable patterns that reflect the activities and 
practices of the workplace. 
 Shape a document’s content, organization, style, design, and 
medium
 Help you anticipate the needs of your readers and their 
situations..

12
Genre and the Technical Writing Process
Genres: 
 Analytical reports follow a different 
genre than technical specifications.
 They are written for different kinds 
of readers for different workplace 
situations. 
 They include different kinds of 
information and follow their own 
organizational patterns. 
 The style and design of these two 
genres are distinctly different..

13
Genre and the Technical Writing Process
Technical writing is a process that includes the stages such as:
1- Planning and researching: planning the project, using research 
to collect information, and developing your own ideas.
2- Organizing and drafting: deciding how to arrange your 
information and then turning those ideas into sentences, 
paragraphs, and sections.
3- Improving the style: Writing clearly and persuasively for your 
readers.
4- Designing the document: developing an appropriate page design 
that improves the usability and attractiveness of your document.
5- Revising and editing: Improving the quality of your work by 
revisioning, rewriting, and proofreading your writing..

14
Genre and the Technical Writing Process
The technical writing process involves moving 
back and forth among several stages.
Each stage is shaped by the genre of the document.

15
Genre and the Technical Writing Process
 While drafting, you may discover that you need to do more 
research on your topic. 
 While editing, you may decide that you need to draft an 
additional section for the document.
 Overall, these stages will lead you from the beginning of a 
project to the end..

16
Stage 1: Planning and Researching
When planning and researching, you should spend some time 
doing three activities:
A- Define the rhetorical situation: Identify your document’s 
subject, purpose, readers, and context of use.
B- State your purpose: Sharpen your purpose into a one-sentence 
statement that will guide your research and drafting of the 
document.
C- Research your subject: Use electronic, print, and empirical 
sources to collect information on your subject.

17
Stage 1: Planning and Researching
A- Define the rhetorical situation:
The five W and How questions give you a sense of your rhetorical 
situation.
 Who are my readers, and who else is involved with the project?
 What do the readers want and need, and what do I want and need?
 Where do they need the information, and where will they use it?
 When will the information be used, and when is it needed?
 Why do the readers need the information in this document?
 How should I achieve my purpose and goals?..

18
Stage 1: Planning and Researching
A- Define the rhetorical situation: 
Four elements of the rhetorical situation:
• Subject – what is document about?  What is the scope of the project?
• Purpose – what is the document trying to achieve? Why do the readers 
need it? What do they need to know?
• Readers – who are the readers? What are their needs and interests? 
What are they looking for?
• Context of Use – where and when will the document be used? What 
constraints are there?

19
Stage 1: Planning and Researching
B- State your purpose:
It is what you want to do and what you want the document to 
achieve.
 Your purpose statement is like a compass for the document. 
Once you have clearly defined your purpose for yourself and 
your readers, you can use that purpose statement to guide your 
decisions about the content, organization, style, and design of 
your document.
 When defining your purpose, try to express exactly what you 
want your document to achieve..

20
Stage 1: Planning and Researching
B- State your purpose:
 Sometimes it helps to find an appropriate action verb and then build 
your purpose statement around it. Here are some useful action verbs that 
you might use:
 The purpose of my report is to review  …….. 
 The purpose of my proposal is to recommend ……...

21
Stage 1: Planning and Researching
C- Research your subject:
It is your next step. 
 You need to gather information from a variety of sources, 
including the Internet, print documents, and empirical 
methods(e.g., experiments, surveys, observations, interviews).

22
Stage 2: Organizing and Drafting the Contents
Two things are done at the same time:
1- Organizing the content: Using common genres to shape your 
ideas into documents that will be familiar to readers.
2- Drafting the content: Generating the content of your document 
by including facts, data, reasoning, and examples.
If you understand the genre, you will understand how to organize 
the information you’ve collected in away that achieves your purpose.

23
Stage 2: Organizing and Drafting the Contents
 A genre follows a pattern that readers will find familiar.
 Readers would immediately recognize this document as a set of 
instructions and be able to use it.

24
Stage 3: Improving the Style
All documents have a style, effective or not. 
Good style is a choice you can and should make. 
Two kinds of style widely used in technical documents:
1- Plain style: This style stresses clarity and accuracy. By paying 
attention to your sentences and paragraphs, you can make your 
ideas clearer and easier to understand.
2- Persuasive style: You can use it to motivate readers by appealing 
to their values and emotions. You can use similes and analogies to 
add a visual quality to your work. You can use metaphors to 
change your readers’ perspective on issues. Meanwhile, you can 
use tone and pace to add energy and color to your work..

25
Stage 4: Designing the Document
 Your readers will expect your technical documents to be well 
designed with graphs, figures and charts.
 It can be easily designed by computer.
 As you think about the design of your document, keep this saying 
in mind: Readers are “raiders” for information. 
 Your readers want the important parts highlighted for them. 
 They prefer documents that use effective graphics and layout to 
make the information more accessible, interesting, and attractive.

26
Stage 4: Designing the Document
Because readers are raiders of information, you want the design of 
your document to be visually accessible.

27
Stage 5: Revising and Editing
 When you have finished drafting and designing the document, 
you are only a little over halfway finished. 
 In technical communication, it is crucial to leave plenty of time 
for revising, editing, and proof reading. 
 Clarity and accuracy are essential if your readers are going to 
understand what you are trying to tell them.
 There are four levels of revising and editing:
• Level 1:  Revising,
• Level 2:  Substantive editing.
• Level 3:  Copyediting.
• Level 4:  Proofreading..

28
Stage 5: Revising and Editing
level 1: Revising: Re-examine your subject and purpose while 
thinking again, about the information your readers need to 
know.
level 2: Substantive editing: Look closely at the content, 
organization, and design of the document to make sure 
your readers can find the information they need.
level 3: copyediting: Pay close attention to the document’s 
sentences, paragraphs, and graphics to make sure they are 
clear, accurate, and efficient.
level 4: Proofreading: Carefully proofread your document to 
eliminate grammar problems, typos, spelling errors, and 
usage mistakes..

29
Stage 5: Revising and Editing
 In workplace documents, errors are a signal of low-quality work.
 Revising and editing is a crucial step in the technical workplace, 
where clarity and accuracy are essential.
 Your supervisors will ask you to do much more revising and 
editing than your college professors..

30
What Is Technical Communication?
Technical Communication is a process of managing technical 
information in ways that allow people to take actions.
Technical communication puts much more emphasis on managing 
information and taking action than most other forms of writing.

31
How Important Is Technical Communication?
Oral and Written Communication Skills are among the most 
important in the technical workplace.
A survey in a certain workplace shows that:
❑ 40% of employers wanted new hires to have better speaking skills; 
❑ 25% wanted new hires to have better writing skills…………