Dr . Bardies Shaban 
Management of patient with 
Musculoskeletal diseases

2- Hip Replacement
Definition 
Causes 
Types 
Manifestations 
Managements
Complications

•Definition:
Surgery to remove damaged sections of the hip
joint and replace them. Replacement parts are
usually made of metal, ceramic and hard plastic.
Also called total hip arthroplasty.

❖ Hip replacement might be an option if hip pain
interferes with daily activities and nonsurgical treatments
haven't helped and not effective.

Reasons for replacement:
 Osteoarthritis
Most common cause
 Rheumatoid Arthritis
Autoimmune condition that causes chronic joint
inflammation

Reasons for replacement:
• Hip Fracture: common in older adults after 
falls
• Avascular Necrosis
Bone tissue death due to poor blood
supply (can result from alcohol, steroids, or
trauma)

Total hip replacement 
Partial hip replacement 
Hip Resurfacing
Types of hip replacement

1- Total hip replacement (THR)
O Most common
O Replaces : Acetabulum (socket), and Femoral head (ball)

2- Partial hip replacement (PHR)
O Only the femoral head is replaced

3- Hip Resurfacing
O Metal cap is placed over the femoral head instead of removing it
O More common in younger patients.

• Vital signs
• Level of consciousness
• Wound drainage
• Breath sounds
• Bowel sounds
• Fluid balance
• Pain
Nursing process for patients Undergoing 
Orthopedic Surgery.
1- Assessment
Report any 
abnormality

The nurse assesses the patient's legs daily for calf tenderness, calf 
edema, and a positive Homan's sign
Homan's sign Definition: Pain, tenderness in the calf or behind the knee 
when the foot is dorsiflexed while the knee is slightly flexed

2- Nursing Diagnoses
1. Pain related to the surgical procedure.
2. Impaired physical mobility related to pain, swelling.
3. Altered body image and self-esteem related to impact of musculoskeletal 
problems.
4. High risk for altered peripheral tissue perfusion related to swelling and 
impaired circulation.
5. High risk for fluid volume deficit related to excessive losses from surgery.
6. High risk for infection related to traumatized tissues.

3- Planning
The major goals of the patient after orthopedic surgery may 
include:
1. Relief from pain.
2. Improve mobility
3. Adequate tissue perfusion
4. Health maintenance
5. Improved mobility
6. Improved self-concept
7. Absence of complications

Pain related to the surgical procedure 
Nursing Interventions:
1. Analgesic as prescribed to control the pain (used 
as a preventive).
2. Elevation of the operative extremity 
and application of cold compresses , if 
prescribed, help to control edema.
3. Portable suction of the wound 
decreases fluid accumulation and 
hematoma formation.
4. After 3 to 4 days, most patients require 
only oral analgesia.
4- Implementation

Impaired physical mobility related to pain, swelling
Nursing Interventions:
1- Some orthopedic procedures require prolonged protection from excessive movement,   
weight-bearing restrictions, immobilizing splints, casts.
2-Using of walking aid (crutches, walker) which facilitate postoperative mobility.
3- Preoperative practice with mobility aids helps the patient use them postoperatively.
4- Rehabilitation involves progressively increasing the patient's activities and exercises 
as prescribed.

High risk for fluid volume deficit related to excessive losses from surgery
Nursing Interventions:
1- Identifies early signs and symptoms of shock and reports the findings to the 
orthopedic surgeon 
2- Frequent monitoring of vital signs and report any 
abnormalities 
3- Frequent monitoring of intake and output.
4- Fluid replacement accordingly.

High risk for altered peripheral tissue perfusion related to swelling and impaired 
circulation
Nursing Interventions:
The nurse monitors neurovascular status of the involved part.(5 P)

The nurse should remind the patient to ankle and calf pumping exercises as prescribed to 
enhance circulation.

High risk for infection related to traumatized tissues
Nursing Interventions:
1. Prophylactic systemic antibiotics are frequently prescribed during the 
preoperative and immediate postoperative period.
2. The nurse assesses the patient's response to these antibiotics.
3. Following aseptic technique in wound dressing is essential.
4. The nurse monitors the patient's vital signs, assesses the wound, and notes 
the character of the drainage.
5. Hand washing, and frequent wound care reduces the development of 
infections.

5- Evaluation
Expected outcomes: The patient
1. Reports controlled pain.
2. Exhibits adequate tissue perfusion
3. Maximizes mobility within the therapeutic limits
4. Expresses positive self-concept.
5. Promotes health
6. Exhibits absence of complications

• List 3 types of hip replacement 
• List 4 nursing diagnosis for 
patient undergoing orthopedic 
surgery 
• List 5ps for neurovascular 
assessment