Management of patients
with
Gastrointestinal diseases
Dr . Bardies shaban

3- Hepatitis 
’é× Definition 
’é× Types   
’é× Manifestations
’é× Diagnosis 
’é× Complications  
’é× Managements

Hepatitis: inflammation and damage of the liver cells,
Caused by viral infection (viral hepatitis) , exposure to alcohol,
or toxic chemical substances or disorder in the immune system.

ŌĆó Mild infection, resolve within 2 months without 
leaving long-term effects 
ŌĆó Also called ( infectious jaundice ).
ŌĆó Once the person had the infection, cannot get it again.
ŌĆó The mortality rate is approximately 0.5% for patients
under 40 years and 1-2% for patients over 40 years.
Hepatitis A

Mode of transmission:
- Fecal oral route
- Contaminated foods or water
- Hands or other objects contaminated with infected feces
- Sexual intercourse (oral ŌĆōanal)
- Undercooked shellfish like oysters, 
mussels, and clams

’üĄ Provide gradual activity and rest to prevent fatigue.
’üĄ Small frequent meals, high protein diet.
’üĄ Monitor fluid balance.
’üĄ If anorexia and vomiting persists, enteral feeding is 
recommended.
’üĄ Educate patient to seek medical care if symptoms persists or 
worsen.
’üĄ Drink plenty of fluids to avoid or prevent dehydration. (I&O)
’üĄ Avoid alcoholic beverages because it worsens the effect of the 
virus.
Nursing management

’üĄ Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the major cause of cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma
’üĄ It may be either acute (self- limiting) or chronic (long standing 
infection).
’üĄ People with self-limiting infection clear the infection
spontaneously within weeks to months. 
Hepatitis B

Prevention 
ŌĆó Blood test of donors or blood transfusions.
ŌĆó Use of disposable syringes and needles
ŌĆó Good personnel hygiene.
ŌĆó  Use protective barriers as gloves when dealing with body 
fluids.
ŌĆó Immunization (HB vaccine)

Hepatitis C
’üĄ It was known as none A, non B 
hepatitis.
’üĄ Between age 40 to 59 years.
’üĄ  The infection can now be 
cured
’üĄ 15 to 25 percent of people with 
HCV clear the infection without 
treatment

ŌØæ Cover cuts and blisters
ŌØæ Properly dispose of any used bandages, tissues, or anything 
containing blood
ŌØæ Wash hands or objects that have come in contact with blood
ŌØæ Clean spilled blood on surfaces
ŌØæ DonŌĆÖt share personal items that have blood on it
ŌØæ Do not breastfeed if your nipples becomes cracked and bleed
ŌØæ Do not donate blood, sperm, or organs
Prevention

Hepatitis D 
’üĄ It is a small virus that requires concomitant infection with 
HBV to survive. 
’üĄ HDV cannot survive on its own because it requires a 
protein that the HBV makes to enable it to infect liver cells.
’üĄ Individuals who already have chronic HBV infection can 
acquire HDV infection at the same time.

Mode of transmission 
’üĄ Shared needles among drug abusers
’üĄ Contaminated blood
’üĄ Sexual contact
’üĄ No vaccine for hepatitis D is available. However, HBV 
vaccine can prevent an individual not infected with HBV 
from contracting hepatitis D because hepatitis D virus 
requires live HBV to replicate in the body.