Management of patients 
with  
Gastrointestinal  diseases  
Dr . Bardies shaban

 Definition  
 Causes   
 Manifestations 
 Diagnosis  
 Complications   
 Managements

Definition of 
cholecystitis    
acute inflammation of 
the gallbladder, causes 
pain, tenderness, and 
rigidity of the upper 
right abdomen that 
may radiate to right 
shoulder.

Causes  
Calculus cholecystitis 
is the cause of more 
than 90% of 
cholecystitis. In which 
a gallbladder stone 
obstructs bile outflow.  
Bacteria

Function of the gall bladder: 
 The gallbladder functions as a storage for bile .The bile is a 
thick, brown liquid and composed of water and electrolytes 
(sodium, potassium, calcium, chloride, and bicarbonate). 
 Bile: digestion of fat, neutralize of gastric acid

Definition of 
Cholelithiasis    
Calculi or gallstones, 
usually form in the 
gallbladder from the solid 
constituents of bile, they 
vary in size, shape and 
composition.

 Some stones be the size of a grain of sand, or they 
may be crystals that can be seen only with a 
microscope.

• Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA )has been used to dissolve small 
gallstones composed primarily of cholesterol. 
• Treatment with UDCA can reduce the size of existing stones, 
dissolve small stones, and prevent new stones from forming 
• Six to 12 months of therapy are required in many patients to 
dissolve stones, and monitoring of the patient for recurrence of 
symptoms. 
Pharmacological  management

 Nutritional 
 Low-fat diet. 
 Cooked fruits, rice or lean meats, mashed potatoes, non– 
gas-forming vegetables and bread. 
  The patient should avoid eggs, cream, fried foods, cheese, 
and alcohol. 
 Approximately 80% of the patients achieve remission with 
rest, IV fluids, nasogastric suction, analgesia, and antibiotic. 
Medical management

 Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy 
    Repeated shockwaves directed at the gallstones in the 
gallbladder to fragment the stones. 
 
 
Non invasive / non surgical  management

 Intracorporeal Lithotripsy 
Using of laser pulse technology 
Non surgical  management

 Cholecystectomy 
Surgical management 
 
•   4 small incision 
made through the 
abdominal wall. 
Laparoscopic  
   large incision 
through abdominal. Surgical 
/open

Postoperative Nursing Interventions 
Analgesic as prescribed to control the pain. 
Use of a pillow over the incision may reduce pain. 
Complete frequent assessment of pain. 
Note and report right upper quadrant abdominal pain 
 
1- Relieving Pain

Postoperative Nursing Interventions 
Places the patient in the semi fowler’s position. 
Nasogastric suction to relieve abdominal distention. 
Encourage deep breath and cough every hour to expand 
the lung fully and prevent atelectasis. 
Early ambulation  
2- Improving Respiratory Status

Postoperative Nursing Interventions 
• Frequently change of dressing and protection of the skin 
from irritation because bile is corrosive to the skin. 
• Every 24 h the nurse measures the bile collected and record 
the amount, color and character of the drainage. 
• Within 7 to 14 days the drainage tube is removed 
3- Maintaining Skin Integrity  &  
    Promoting Biliary Drainage

Postoperative Nursing Interventions 
• Water and fluids are given in about 24 hours  
• Maintain a careful record of fluid intake and output. 
• soft diet is started when bowel sounds return. 
• low fats diet and high in carbohydrate and proteins. 
4- Improving Nutritional Status

Postoperative Nursing Interventions 
• Closely monitor vital signs and inspect the surgical 
incision and drain. 
• Instructs the patient and family to report any 
changes in color of stool. 
• Assess the patient for loss of appetite, vomiting, 
pain, distention of the abdomen and increase 
temperature. 
5- Monitoring and Managing Complications

Postoperative Nursing Interventions 
• Inform the patient about symptoms that should be reported to 
the physician which include : 
• jaundice, dark urine, pale colored stool, signs of inflammation 
and infection as pain or fever. 
• Take a shower or bath after 1 or 2 days. 
• Drive a car after 3 or 4 days. 
• Avoid lifting objects exceeding 5 pounds (2.5 kg) after surgery, 
usually for 1 week. 
 
6- general heath teaching

• Call surgeon if experience any signs or symptoms of 
infection at or around the puncture site: redness, 
tenderness, or swelling.  
• Wash puncture site with mild soap and water.