Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism refers to a 
deficiency of thyroid hormone 
in the adult, resulting in slowed 
body metabolism due to 
decreased oxygen consumption 
by the tissues and pronounced 
personality changes.

Myxedema is a complication of 
hypothyroidism characterized by a 
generalized hypo-metabolic state. 
Myxedema coma is a life-
threatening situation in which all 
body systems are severely 
compromised by the hypo-metabolic 
state.

Etiology: There are several types of hypothyroidism:
Primary 
Secondary 
Tertiary

Primary hypothyroidism may be caused by
Congenital 
defects of 
Thyroid 
Defective 
hormone 
synthesis
Iodine deficiency 
Surgery or 
radioactive 
therapy for 
hyperthyroidism
Antithyroid 
drugs
Following 
chronic 
inflammatory 
diseases

Medical management of hypothyroidism
Pharmacologic Management
Hypothyroidism. The goals of 
treatment for hypothyroidism 
are to correct thyroid hormone 
deficiency and reverse symptoms 
and prevent further cardiac and 
arterial damage.

For hypothyroidism to be reversed 
permanently, the client usually needs to take 
thyroid hormone preparation throughout 
life. Available thyroid medications include 
sodium levothyroxine, and desiccated 
thyroid, converted in the body to both T4 
and T3
Clients with cardiac 
complications must be started 
on small doses of thyroid 
hormone. Large doses could 
precipitate heart failure or 
myocardial infarction

Myxedema Coma: The goal of treatment for 
myxedema coma is to reverse the condition to save the 
client's life. Supportive measures are begun 
immediately, such as maintaining a patent airway, 
giving oxygen, and replacing fluid intravenously.

Surgical Management
Surgery is done for goiter that is 
very large, not responding to 
treatment, or putting too much 
pressure on other structures in the 
neck.

Nursing Diagnosis: Skin Integrity, High Risk for 
Impaired related to edema and dryness secondary to 
infiltration of fluid into interstitial spaces.
Planning: Expected Outcomes; The client will have 
all skin remain intact, as evidenced by absence of 
injury and resolution of edema.

Implementation: The nurse must monitor the sacrum 
coccyx, elbows, scapula, and other pressure points for 
signs of redness or tissue breakdown. The nurse must 
remember that edematous tissues are more prone to 
decubitus ulcer formation. The client should be placed on 
a strict turning schedule and on a pressure reduction 
mattress.

Nursing Diagnosis: Hypothermia related to slowed metabolic rate.
Planning: Expected Outcomes; The client will not develop 
hypothermia, as evidenced by a normal body temperature.
Implementation: Provide the client with a comfortable, warm 
environment. Remember that hypothyroidism sharply increases 
sensitivity to cold. If necessary, supply extra clothing and warm 
blankets.

Nursing Diagnosis: Social Isolation related to lethargy, weakness, apathy, and 
changes in appearance.
Planning: Expected Outcomes; The client will return to a pre-illness level of social 
interaction, as evidenced by increasing interaction with others and statements of 
acceptance of reversibility of appearance changes.
Implementation: The nurse must reassure' the client and significant others that the 
clients appearance and energy level will gradually improve with thyroid hormone 
therapy.

Hyperthyroidism is the second most 
common endocrine disorder, after diabetes 
mellitus. Graves's disease, the most common type 
of hyperthyroidism result from an excessive 
output of thyroid hormones caused by abnormal 
stimulation of the thyroid gland by circulating 
immunoglobulin.

Hyperthyroidism affects women eight 
times than men. It may appear after 
emotional shock, stress or infection. 
Other common causes of 
hyperthyroidism include thyroiditis and 
excessive ingestion of thyroid hormone.

Diagnostic Assessment:
• The client's  physical  appearance  (enlarged  neck,  
protruding  eyes,  agitated  expression ; the symptoms  of 
agitation,  restlessness . and weight  loss.
• Laboratory  findings . The serum  thyroid  hormone  levels  
are usually  elevated ; serum  cholesterol  levels  are usually  
depressed .