Clinical Manifestations
Cardiovascular manifestations
Hypertension (due to sodium and water retention), 
heart failure and pulmonary edema (due to fluid 
overload are among the cardiovascular problems 
manifested in ESRD.

Dermatologic symptoms
Severe itching (pruritus) is common. 
The deposit of urea crystals on the skin, 
is uncommon today because of early 
and aggressive treatment of ESRD with 
dialysis.

Other Systemic Manifestations
GI signs and symptoms are common and 
include anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. 
Neurologic changes, including altered 
levels of consciousness, inability to 
concentrate, muscle twitching, and 
seizures, have been observed.

Neurologic
Weakness and fatigue; inability to concentrate; 
disorientation; tremors; seizures; restlessness of 
legs; burning of soles of feet; behavior changes

Integumentary
Gray-bronze skin color; dry, skin; 
pruritis; purpura; thin, brittle 
nails; and thinning hair.

Cardiovascular
Hypertension; pitting edema 
(feet, hands); per orbital 
edema; pericardial friction 
rub; engorged neck veins; 
pericarditis; hyperkalemia; 
hyperlipidemia

Pulmonary
Crackles; thick, tenacious 
sputum; depressed cough 
reflex; shortness of breath; 
tachypnea; uremic 
pneumonitis; “uremic lung”

Gastrointestinal
Ammonia odor to breath; metallic taste; mouth 
ulcerations and bleeding; anorexia, nausea, and vomiting; 
constipation or diarrhea; bleeding from gastrointestinal 
tract

Hematologic
Anemia; thrombocytopenia
Reproductive
Amenorrhea; testicular atrophy; 
infertility

Musculoskeletal   
Muscle cramps; loss of muscle strength; 
bone pain; bone fractures

Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
Decreased GFR can be 
detected by obtaining a 
24-hour urinalysis for 
creatinine clearance.
Some patients retain 
sodium and water, 
increasing the risk for 
edema, heart failure, and 
hypertension
With advanced renal 
disease, metabolic 
acidosis occurs because 
the kidney cannot excrete 
increased loads of acid. 
Anemia develops as a 
result of inadequate 
erythropoietin 
production, nutritional 
deficiencies. 
Another major 
abnormality seen in 
chronic renal failure is a 
disorder in calcium and 
phosphorus metabolism.

Complications
Pericarditis
Hyperkalemia 
Anemia 
Hypertension 
Bone disease and metastatic calcifications

Pharmacologic Therapy
Antihyperte
nsive and 
Cardiovasc
ular Agents
Antacids
Dialysis
Dietary 
intervention
Erythropoie
tin

create unique image about Nursing Management 
Examples of potential nursing diagnoses for these 
patients include the following:
•  Excess fluid volume related to decreased urine output, 
and retention of sodium and water. 
• Imbalanced nutrition: less than body requirements 
related to anorexia, nausea and vomiting

•Deficient knowledge regarding condition 
and treatment regimen.
• Activity intolerance related to fatigue, 
anaemia and dialysis procedure. 
•Low self-esteem related to dependency.

Dialysis is used to remove fluid 
and uremic waste products from 
the body when the kidneys 
cannot do so.

Acute dialysis is indicated when there is a 
high level of serum potassium, fluid overload, or 
increasing acidosis, and severe confusion. It may 
also be used to remove certain medications or 
other toxins (poisoning or medication overdose) 
from the blood.

Chronic or maintenance 
dialysis is indicated in 
chronic renal failure, 
known as end-stage renal 
disease (ESRD)

Hemodialysis is the most 
commonly used method of dialysis. It 
is used for patients who are acutely ill 
and require short-term dialysis (days 
to weeks) and for patients with ESRD 
who require long-term or permanent 
therapy.

Complications of Hemodialysis
1.Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
2.Disturbances of lipid metabolism 
3.Heart failure, and angina pain.
4. Anemia and fatigue 
5. Increased dialyzer clotting may occur

6. Gastric ulcers and other gastrointestinal problems.
7. Renal osteodystrophy that produces bone pain and 
fractures.
8. Heart failure, malnutrition, infection, neuropathy, and 
pruritis.
9. Up to 85% of people undergoing hemodialysis experience 
major sleep problems

10. Hypotension may occur during the 
treatment 
11. Painful muscle cramping may occur.
    12. Dysrhythmia 
    13. Chest pain may occur in patients with anemia 
 14. Acute allergic reaction and uremic pruritis

Long-Term Management
During dialysis, the patient, the dialyzer, and the 
dialysate bath require constant monitoring because 
numerous complications are possible. The nurse in the 
dialysis unit has an important role in monitoring, 
supporting, assessing, and educating the patient.

Pharmacological Therapy
Patients undergoing hemodialysis 
who require medications (e.g., antibiotic 
agents, antiarrhythmic medications, 
antihypertensive agents) are monitored 
closely to ensure that blood and tissue 
levels of these medications are maintained 
without toxic accumulation.

Nursing Management
1. Meeting psychosocial needs: The nurse needs to give the patient and family 
the opportunity to express feelings of anger and concern over the limitations 
that the disease and treatment impose and over possible financial problems 
and job insecurity. 
a. Counseling and psychotherapy may be necessary. 
b. The nurse helps the patient to identify safe, effective coping strategies to 
cope with these problems and fears.

Continuing Care:
The health care team’s goal in 
treating patients with chronic 
renal failure is to maximize their 
vocational potential, functional 
status, and quality of life.

The goals of peritoneal dialysis are to remove 
toxic substances and metabolic wastes and to re-
establish normal fluid and electrolyte balance. 
Peritoneal dialysis may be the treatment of 
choice for patients with renal failure who are 
unable or unwilling to undergo hemodialysis or 
renal transplantation.

In peritoneal dialysis, the 
peritoneum, a serous membrane 
that covers the abdominal organs 
and lines the abdominal wall, 
serves as the semi permeable 
membrane. Sterile dialysate fluid 
is introduced into the peritoneal 
cavity through an abdominal 
catheter at intervals.

Nursing Management
1. protecting the vascular access
The nurse assesses the vascular access for 
patency and takes precautions to ensure that the 
extremity with the vascular access is not used for 
measuring blood pressure or for obtaining blood 
specimens; tight dressings, restraints, or jewelry 
over the vascular access are to be avoided as well.

Taking Precautions During Intravenous Therapy
When the patient needs intravenous 
therapy, the rate of administration must be as 
slow as possible and should be strictly 
controlled by a volumetric infusion pump.

Monitoring Symptoms of Uremia
As metabolic end products accumulate, uremic symptoms worsen. 
Patients whose metabolic rate accelerates (those on corticosteroid 
medications or parenteral nutrition, those with infections) accumulate 
waste products more quickly and may require daily dialysis. These 
same patients are more likely to experience complications than other 
dialysis patients.

Detecting cardiac and respiratory complications
Cardiac and respiratory 
assessment must be conducted 
frequently. As fluid builds up, fluid 
overload, heart failure, and 
pulmonary edema develop. Crackles 
in the bases of the lungs may indicate 
pulmonary edema.

Controlling Electrolyte Levels and Diet
Electrolyte alterations are common, and 
potassium changes can be life threatening. 
All intravenous solutions and medications to 
be administered are evaluated for their 
electrolyte content. Serum laboratory values 
are assessed daily

Managing Discomfort and Pain
Complications such as pruritus and pain secondary to 
neuropath must be managed. Antihistamine agents are 
commonly used, and analgesic medications may be 
prescribed.

Monitoring Blood Pressure
Hypertension in renal failure is common. It is 
usually the result of fluid overload. Many dialysis 
patients receive some form of antihypertensive 
therapy and require intense teaching about its 
purpose and adverse effects.