ABDOMINAL 
HERNIA
By:
Dr/ Montaser Elsawy
Professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery
Master Degree in General Surgery (MS)
MD in Cardiothoracic Surgery

Aetiology
Definition:
• A hernia is an abnormal protrusion of a cavity's contents, through a weakness 
in the wall of the cavity, taking with it all the linings of the cavity.
Types: Hernias may exploit natural openings :
• Inguinal and femoral canals, obturator canal 
• Umbilicus, esophageal hiatus, or protrude through areas weakened by stretching 
(e.g. epigastric hernia) or surgical incision. 
Factors contribute to the development of hernias:  
hernias can be considered design faults, either anatomical or through inherited 
collagen disorders. The Type I to III collagen ratio is important to make up of 
the tissues.

General Considerations
▪ The neck: The neck of the sac is the constriction 
formed by the orifice in the abdominal wall through 
which the hernia passes.
▪ Content:A hernia may contain most commonly 
omentum and/or small bowel. 
▪ Classification: Hernia may be reducible or 
irreducible, and the contents (e.g. bowel) may become 
obstructed or strangulated
▪ Strangulation: denotes compromise of the blood 
supply of the contents and its development 
significantly increases morbidity and mortality.

Inguinal Hernia
• Incidence: The most common types of groin 
hernia are indirect inguinal (60%), direct 
inguinal (25%) and femoral (15%). 
• Gender: Most (85%) groin hernias occur in males. 
• Age: In early life, an indirect inguinal hernia is 
the most common variety. 
-After middle age, weakness of the abdominal 
musculature leads to an increasing incidence of direct 
inguinal hernias. 
• Femoral hernias: are more common in females 
(because of stretching of widening of the femoral ring in 
pregnancy), but an indirect inguinal hernia is still the most 
common type of groin hernia in women.

Surgical anatomy
• The inguinal canal is an oblique passage in the lower 
anterior abdominal wall, through which the spermatic cord 
passes to the testis in the male, or the round ligament to the 
labium majus in the female. 
• The processus vaginalis traversing the canal is normally 
obliterated at birth, but persistence in whole or in part 
presents an anatomical predisposition to an indirect inguinal 
hernia. 
• The openings of the canal are formed by the internal and 
external rings. 
• The internal (deep) inguinal ring lies approximately 1 
cm above the mid-inguinal point (midway between the pubic 
tubercle and the anterior superior iliac spine). 
• The internal inguinal ring is bounded medially by the inferior 
epigastric artery. 
• The external (superficial) inguinal ring: The inguinal 
canal ends at  which is an opening  just above and medial to 
the pubic tubercle.

Coverings and Contents of Spermatic Cord
• Coverings of the Spermatic Cord:
• 1-The innermost layer is the internal 
spermatic fascia, 
• 2- The middle layer is the cremasteric 
muscle and fascia
• 3- The outer layer is the external 
spermatic fascia. 
Contents of the spermatic cord:
1-The vas deferens
2-Arteries 
•     Artery of the vas , Testicular artery, Cremasteric 
artery 
3- Veins:
• Pampiniform plexus of veins
4-Nerves
• Ilio-inguinal nerve, the genital branch of the 
genitofemoral nerve
5-Lymphatics.

Indirect inguinal hernia
• An indirect inguinal hernia enters the internal (deep) inguinal 
ring and descends within the coverings of the spermatic cord so 
that it can pass on down into the scrotum, the so called inguino-
scrotal hernia. 
• An inguinal hernia, which passes into the 
scrotum, passes above and medial to the 
pubic tubercle, in contrast to a femoral 
hernia, which bulges below and lateral to 
the tubercle.
• While bilateral inguinal hernias are not 
common, it is unusual for both hernias to be of 
similar size.

Clinical Features
▪ There may be a dragging discomfort in the groin. 
• The hernia forms a lump in the groin (a swelling in the inguinal canal), which may extend 
into the scrotum. 
• It is often readily visible when the patient stands or is asked to cough. 
• A cough impulse is normally palpable, and bowel sounds can often be heard within the 
hernia on auscultation.
• The hernia often reduces spontaneously when the patient lies down, or it may be 
reduced by gentle pressure applied in an upward and lateral direction. 
• It may be possible to control the hernia, once reduced, by placing a finger over the 
internal (deep) inguinal ring.

Direct inguinal hernia
• Causes: Direct hernias are due to weakness of the abdominal wall and may be precipitated by 
increases in intra-abdominal pressure (e.g. obstructive airways disease, BPH, chronic 
constipation).
• Boundaries:  ( Hesselbach's triangle)
•  Above by the conjoint tendon
• Below by the inguinal ligament
• Laterally by the inferior epigastric vessels. 
• The sac has a wide neck, so that the hernia seldom 
becomes irreducible, obstructs or strangulates.
• The neck of the sac of a direct inguinal hernia lies medial to 
the inferior epigastric vessels, whereas that of an indirect 
hernia lies lateral to them.

Management of 
uncomplicated
inguinal hernia
• The identification of an inguinal hernia in any child is nearly 
always an indication to operate. 
• Elective surgery is usually undertaken on a day-case basis, with 
liberal use of local anaesthetic blocks for postoperative pain relief.

Indirect inguinal hernia repair
• The first step in the open approach is to open the inguinal 
canal, free the hernial sac from the spermatic cord and excise it 
after transfixing and ligating its neck. 
• Herniotomy: Simple excision of the sac is all that is 
needed in young children. 
• Herniorrhaphy or Hernioplasty: In older children and 
adults, the internal ring is usually stretched and widened, and 
therefore after herniotomy, it is necessary to tighten the deep 
ring and/or strengthen the posterior wall with a synthetic mesh
• Suture repair alone is rare in developed countries in adults, but
still has a place in the repair of groin hernias in adolescents.

Ventral Hernias
Ventral hernias occur through areas of weakness in the
anterior abdominal wall: namely, the linea alba
(epigastric hernia), the umbilicus (umbilical and paraumbilical
hernia), the lateral border of the rectus sheath (Spigelian
hernia), and the scar tissue of surgical incisions (incisional
hernia). Such incisions include scars from laparoscopic
surgery, the so-called port-site hernia.
Epigastric hernia
Epigastric hernias protrude through the linea alba above the level of the 
umbilicus. 
The herniation may consist of extraperitoneal fat or may be a protrusion 
of peritoneum containing omentum. 
The hernia is common in thin individuals.

Para-umbilical hernia
• This hernia is caused by gradual weakening of the tissues around the 
umbilicus. 
• It most often affects obese multiparous women, and passes through the 
attenuated linea alba just above or below the umbilicus. 
• The hernia gradually enlarges, the covering tissues become stretched and 
thin, and eventually loops of bowel may become visible under parchment-
like skin. 
• The sac is often multilocular and may be irreducible because of adhesions 
that form between omentum and loops of bowel.

Incisional hernia
• Over half of incisional hernias occur in the first 5 years 
after the original surgery. 
• Midline vertical incisions are most often affected, and 
poor surgical technique, wound infection, obesity and 
chest infection are important predisposing factors. 
• The diffuse bulge in the wound is best seen when the 
patient coughs or raises the head and shoulders from a 
pillow, thereby contracting the abdominal muscles.
•  Strangulation is rare, but surgical repair is Usually 
advised.
• Again, open or laparoscopic mesh repair is possible.

Complications of hernia
• An irreducible hernia is one in which the contents cannot be manipulated back into the abdominal cavity.
• This is due to narrowing of the neck of the sac by fibrosis, distension of the contained bowel, or adhesions to 
the walls of the sac.
Irreducibility
• The vessels supplying the bowel within a hernia may be compressed by the neck of the sac or 
by the constricting ring through which the hernia passes. The arterial supply is compromised 
and gangrene follows. Bacteria and toxins pass out through the bowel wall, causing peritonitis.
• The patient complains features of intestinal obstruction (Pain, vomiting, abdominal 
distension).
• The cough impulse is lost, and there is increasing evidence of circulatory collapse and sepsis
Strangulation
• An irreducible hernia may progress to intestinal obstruction. Abdominal pain, vomiting and distension signal 
the need for urgent operation before strangulation supervenes.
Obstruction

If there is no evidence of strangulation, an attempt can be made to reduce 
an apparently irreducible hernia by giving analgesia, putting the patient to 
bed with the foot of the bed elevated, and applying gentle pressure.
If the hernia does not reduce readily, emergency same 
day surgery is advised to avoid further complications. 
Femoral hernias are the least likely hernia (of the 
common hernias) to be reduced in this way.
Management of complicated hernia

Management of complicated hernia
In infants and 
children, the majority 
of ‘irreducible’ 
inguinal hernias can, 
in fact, be safely 
reduced by a suitably 
trained clinician.
Small doses of 
intravenous opiate 
analgesia administered 
in the presence of 
suitably trained 
paediatric nursing staff 
can relax the child and 
assist with the 
reduction process.  
Failure to reduce a 
hernia in this manner 
necessitates 
emergency surgery 
which is often more 
difficult than when 
the hernia has been 
reduced prior to 
surgery.

Management of Obstructed Hernia
• Urgent operation is indicated for all obstructed hernias, as one can never be certain 
that strangulation is not present.
• A CT scan is indicated in such cases, especially if an underlying malignancy is 
suspected, such as anaemia, significant weight loss or palpable mass away from 
the hernia. 
• At surgery, the hernial sac is opened and the contents are inspected carefully. 
• If they are viable, they can be returned to the abdominal cavity and the hernia 
repaired. If there is doubt about the viability of a loop of bowel or omentum, the 
devitalized tissue must be resected before proceeding to repair. 
• The use of mesh like any prosthesis, can become infected. Often this requires 
removal of the mesh, with increased risk of recurrence of the hernia.