ACUTE APPENDICITIS& INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
By:
Dr/ Montaser Elsawy,
Professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery
Master Degree in General Surgery (MS)
MD in Cardiothoracic Surgery

ACUTE APPENDICITIS 
Anatomy
• The appendix is a worm-shaped blind-ending tube that arises from the 
posteromedial wall of the caecum 2 cm below the ileocaecal valve. 
• It varies in length from 6–9 cm.
McBurney’s point:
On the surface of the abdomen, this point lies one-third of the way 
along a line drawn between the right anterior superior iliac spine 
and the umbilicus
BLOOD SUPPLY:
The appendix has its own mesentery, the mesoappendix, and its blood 
supply comes from the appendicular artery. 
Position:
The most common site is retrocaecal, but data from diagnostic 
laparoscopy indicate that the pelvic position is probably common.

Aetiology
Several different mechanisms have been proposed:
Diet:
One of the more popular causes being a diet ;lacking in fibre and a 
consequent slow transit time and alteration in bacterial flora.
Viral infection: 
It may be an aetiological agent, as there is an association between 
appendicitis and concurrent viral illness and because there is a seasonal 
variation in the incidence of appendicitis.

Pathogenesis
Faecoliths, lymphoid hyperplasia, foreign bodies, carcinoid 
tumours Appendicular Lumen Obstruction         Wall is 
inflamed Fibrinopurulent exudate extends to peritoneal 
surface.
• Inflammation of the wall of the appendix causes venous congestion, 
which may compromise arterial inflow, leading to ischaemia and 
infarction.

Pathogenesis
• Organisms from the lumen of the appendix enter the submucosa 
through an ischaemic ulcer, causing liquefaction of the wall and 
ultimately perforation.
• As a result of the transmural inflammation, small bowel and 
omentum adhere to the appendix, creating a localized area of sepsis. 
• If left untreated, this may progress to form an appendix mass or 
even an abscess. 
• If perforation occurs early in the clinical course, the inflamed area 
will not have had time to be walled off, and generalized peritonitis 
follows.

Clinical Features
History
ONSET: 
• The onset of acute appendicitis is associated with the gradual onset of poorly localized central abdominal pain.
• After a variable amount of time, the pain moves to the right iliac fossa and changes in character, to become sharper, constant 
and well localized. 
AGGRA V ATING FACTORS:
It is aggravated by movement and coughing.
As described earlier, this change in the nature of the pain occurs when the parietal peritoneum overlying the appendix become s 
involved in the inflammatory process. 
Associated symptoms& signs:
• Symptoms (anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea) and signs (fever, fetor, pallor, abdominal distension). 
• The finding of tenderness and guarding in the right iliac fossa usually makes the diagnosis without the need for other 
investigations.

Examination
The temperature is usually only mildly elevated 
(37.3–38.5°C) and there is often a tachycardia. 
Classically, the area of maximal tenderness is 
over McBurney’s point, with guarding and 
rebound (percussion) tenderness.
Rovsing’s sign: Palpation in the left iliac fossa 
may reproduce the pain in the right iliac fossa 
Psoas stretch sign:  The patient may find it 
painful to extend the right hip owing to 
irritation of the psoas muscle

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
1-UTI: 
▪ An inflamed retrocaecal appendix may produce poorly localized 
abdominal pain, and an inflamed pelvic appendix lying close to the 
bladder may produce symptoms of frequency and dysuria.
IMPORTANT
2- Gastroenteritis :
An inflamed pelvic appendix lying near the rectum causes 
irritation and diarrhoea, and is commonly mistaken for 
gastroenteritis.  
However, gastroenteritis almost never causes abdominal 
tenderness.

Acute appendicitis is most dangerous in the very young, the 
very old and pregnant women. 
As it is uncommon under the age of 2 years, when it does 
occur, it is often incorrectly diagnosed as gastroenteritis. 
The symptoms and signs are atypical and generalized 
peritonitis quickly develops. 
In contrast, in elderly patients, the onset is more insidious.
In the pregnant patient, the appendix is displaced upwards by the 
enlarged uterus, and the site of the pain and tenderness is high in 
the abdomen. 
Appendicitis in pregnancy carries a high rate of 
morbidity and mortality for both mother and fetus.
Special Patient 
Groups

Complications
• Gangrenous appendicitis and perforation tend to 
occur after a significantly more prolonged period of pain 
than uncomplicated appendicitis. 
• Generalized peritonitis results if the inflamed area is not 
walled off by omentum and loops of bowel. 
• Appendix mass or an abscess will develop if 
walling off occurs.
• A perforated pelvic appendix will lead to a pelvic 
abscess, and on examination there may be very little in the 
way of abdominal signs.

Investigations
▪ The diagnosis of acute appendicitis is based on clinical assessment 
and there are no specific diagnostic tests.
▪  Ultrasonography  demonstrates a swollen non-compressible 
appendix, free fluid or even a mass in the right iliac fossa.
▪  If, after clinical assessment, the diagnosis remains in doubt, the 
clinician must proceed along one of two lines: 
     -Either to carry out laparoscopy and undertake appendicectomy if 
indicated, 
     -Or to institute a short policy of close and repeated observation with 
reassessment every hour. 
▪ On occasions when there is diagnostic difficulty, and particularly in 
the elderly, abdominal CT can be helpful in making the diagnosis in 
addition to excluding other conditions.

Management
• The treatment of appendicitis is almost always surgical;  
laparoscopic appendicectomy is being carried out, especially if a 
diagnostic laparoscopy has been performed first to establish the 
diagnosis. 
• It is also possible to treat patients who do not have overt 
peritonitis non-operatively with antibiotics.
 Appendicular mass& Abscess: 
• If, by the time the patient presents, a mass can be felt, non-
operative management with IV fluids and antibiotics is the 
treatment of choice, provided there are no signs of peritonitis 
(when an operation should be carried out). 
• In these patients, an ultrasound scan should be arranged to look 
for an underlying abscess; if one is present, it should be drained 
either under radiological guidance or surgically.

Appendicular mass& Abscess: (Continued)
• Following successful non-operative treatment of an appendix mass, it used to be 
traditional practice to carry out an interval appendicectomy 3–6 months later. 
• This prevents further attacks, and in the elderly makes sure that there is no underlying 
carcinoma of the caecum. 
• It is important, especially in older patients, to exclude a carcinoma of the caecum by 
either double-contrast barium enema or colonoscopy.

INTESTINAL 
OBSTRUCTION
Definition:
Arrest of downward propulsion of the intestinal contents
Classification:
A- ACCORDING TO PATHOLOGY:
1-SIMPLE OBSTRUCTION: due to mechanical occlusuion of the gut lumen 
without interference of blood supply.
2- Strangulation: Interference of blood supply
3- Paralytic ileus: due to loss of propulsive power of the gut leading to 
functional obstruction
B- ACCORDING TO THE LEVEL OF OBSTRUCTION:
1-High small bowel obstruction
2- Low small bowel obstruction
3-Large bowel obstruction
C- ACCORDING TO ONSET& COURSE OF OBSTRUCTION:
1-Acute obstruction: intussusception
2- Chronic obstruction: cancer colon
D- ACCORDING TO MOTILITY:
1- Dynamic obstruction: mechanical occlusion
2- Adynamic obstruction: paralytic ileus

Acute Intestinal Obstruction (according to pathology)
Causes:
1- Simple:
In the lumen (intraluminal)e.g. faecal impaction, gall stone ileus and parasitic infestation.
In the wall (intramural)e.g. Tumors, chronic diverticulitis, Crohn's disease.
Outside the wall (extramural)e.g. adhesions, strangulated hernia and volvulus.
2- Strangulation:
Strangulated hernia, volvulus, intussusception & MVO.

3- Vomiting: By anti-peristaltic movement

SIGNS
General Local
Dehydration: Dry 
tongue, Tachycardia, 
Hypotension, 
Oliguria
Inspection Palpation Percussion Auscultation
1-Abdominal 
Distension
For any mass Tympanitic 
abdomen
For intestinal 
sounds;
Exagerated in simple 
obstruction or 
absent(paralytic 
ileus)
2-Visible Peristalsis
3-Evidence of the 
cause; obstructed 
hernia, scar of 
previous operation

Special ttt for causes of Small IO
• Adhesive small bowel obstructions from numerous abdominal operations are 
frequently technically difficult to manage due to loss of tissue planes and distorted 
anatomy.
• Unless a patient has clearly failed medical treatment, surgery should be deferred until 
after a long nonoperative course of NPO and total parenteral nutrition (TPN).
• Hernias that are incarcerated, but not strangulated, may be reduced. 
• These patients require close monitoring for evidence of bowel ischemia. 
• Conversely, patients with strangulated hernias causing SBO may require bowel 
resection.

Management of Right-Sided Large Bowel Obstruction
A right hemicolectomy and primary anastomosis can be safely performed 
in most cases unless perforation with a significant amount of 
contamination has occurred. 
In this instance, resection with end ileostomy and mucous fistula is 
preferred. 
If a cancer is bulky and unresectable, intestinal bypass may be considered 
as an alternative.

Management of Lt-Sided Large Bowel Obstruction
Obstruction of the left colon presents a more challenging management 
decision, since a large column of feces exists above the point of 
obstruction. 
It is dealt with by a variety of surgical procedures that include:
-Resection and reanastomosis with or without a stoma
-Colostomy and Resection  (Hartmann’s procedure)
-Colostomy without resection.