Haemorrhoids
& Anal Fistula
By:
Dr/ Montaser Elsawy
Professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery
Master Degree in General Surgery (MS)
MD in Cardiothoracic Surgery

Key facts
Broad term, often incorrectly used to refer 
any perianal excess tissue.
True haemorrhoids are excessive amounts of the normal 
endoanal cushions that comprise anorectal mucosa, 
submucosal tissue, and submucosal blood vessels (small 
arterioles and veins).
Commonest age of onset is in young adulthood. 
Associated with constipation, chronic straining, obesity, and 
previous childbirth.

Anatomy
• May become ulcerated and inflamed if recurrently prolapsing.
• If confined to the tissue of the upper anal canal, they are referred to as ‘internal’.
• If extend to the tissues of the lower anal canal, they are referred to as ‘external’.

Clinical features
• Features of irritation: Pruritus ani, mucus 
discharge, and perianal discomfort.
• Features of damage to mucosal lining: Recurrent post-
defecatory bleeding—bright red, not mixed with stools, on 
paper or splashing in the toilet pan.
• Features of prolapse: Intermittent lump appearing at anal 
margin, usually after defecation, may spontaneously reduce or 
require manual reduction.

Diagnosis and investigations
• Diagnosis is usually by rigid sigmoidoscopy and proctoscopy.
• Flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy may be appropriate if there is concern about 
the cause of symptoms; remember—haemorrhoids rarely start over the age of 55y
and it is often best to assume another cause until proven otherwise in these cases.

Treatment
Medical treatment : Avoidance of constipation and straining; 
bulking or softener laxatives.
Surgical treatment
1.  Banding or excessive tissue. Best for prolapse symptoms (not 
possible for external components due to excellent nerve supply of 
lower anal canal).
2. Dilute phenol injections (5% in almond oil). Best for bleeding 
symptoms.

Treatment
(Continued)
3. Haemorrhoidal devascularization procedures (e.g. arterial ligation 
‘HALO’ either Doppler ultrasound-guided or blind). For failed topical 
treatments and surgery not indicated/desired.
4. Haemorrhoidectomy for large external haemorrhoids or 
haemorrhoids failing to respond to conservative treatment. Associated 
with a small risk of impaired continence and anal stenosis.
5. Stapled anopexy (also called PPH). Sometimes used for 
circumferential prolapsing haemorrhoids.

Fistula-in-ano
Key facts
• A fistula is an abnormal connection of two 
epithelial surfaces and the two surfaces 
joined in fistula in ano are the anorectal 
lining and the perineal or vaginal skin. 
• Very common, especially in otherwise fit 
young adults. 
• May occur in the presence of Crohn’s 
disease; minor association with obesity and 
diabetes mellitus, very rarely due to trauma 
or ulceration of anorectal tumours.

Pathological features
Commonest cause is sepsis arising in an anal 
gland that forces its way out through the anal 
tissues to appear in the perianal or in women, 
vaginal skin (cryptoglandular theory of fistula in 
ano).
Often presents initially as an acute perianal 
abscess. 
The tissues through which the track pushes 
determines the classification of fistulas.

Clinical features
• Acute perianal abscess. Rapid onset of severe 
perianal or perineal pain.
• Swelling and erythema of the perianal skin with fever 
and tachycardia.
• Recurrent perianal sepsis. Recurrent 
intermittent sepsis typified by gradual build-up of 
‘pressure’ sensation and swelling in the perianal skin and 
eventual discharge of bloodstained purulent fluid.
• Chronic perianal discharge. Persistent low grade
sepsis of the track with chronic discharge of seropurulent 
fluid via a punctum that is usually clearly identified by the 
patient.

Diagnosis and investigations
Diagnosis and investigation should aim to confirm the presence of a fistula and identify the course of 
the track to determine the type of fistula:
• Examination of the perineum and rectal examination may reveal a palpable fibrous track.
• Probing of any external opening to aid identification of the course of the track.
• Endoanal ultrasound (sometimes with hydrogen peroxide injected into the track) identifies the course 
of the track.
• MRI scanning is probably the most sensitive method of determining the course of the track and 
identifying any occult perianal or pelvic sepsis.
• Flexible sigmoidoscopy if associated colorectal disease, e.g. Crohn’s disease, is suspected.