Fracture management
Classification
Fractures are usually classified by:
• whether they are in communication with the skin surface 
(open or compound) or not (closed).
• Their appearance on X-ray: for example:
• A) Comminuted (in multiple pieces, Fig.1, spiral (where the 
fracture curves in a large spiral around the long axis of the 
bone)
• B) Transverse (straight across the bone, Fig.2) This 
appearance usually correlates with the mechanism of injury 
– a twisting injury tends to cause a spiral fracture for 
example.
• C) Anatomical site: for example, intra-articular (involving 
the joint surface, Fig. 3), metaphyseal, epiphyseal or 
diaphyseal

Classification of Fractures
Fig.1 Fig.2 Fig.3

Principles of Fracture Healing
• There are many differing ways of treating fractures.
•  However, they all have the same fundamental objectives: namely, 
the close approximation of uncontaminated, well-vascularized bone 
ends in a stable configuration that will maximize bone and soft 
tissue healing without deformity or loss of function.
• In general, the fracture healing process takes approximately 8–10 
weeks in adults but can take longer depending on the severity of the 
injury and whether it is an open fracture.

Compound Fractures
•These should be treated within 6 hours. 
•However, new guidance from the combined 
orthopaedic and plastic surgery associations advises 
that these injuries can be left until the following 
morning (if admitted overnight and not grossly 
contaminated) when an experienced surgeon is 
available.

Definitive treatment should involve:
➢Removal of all the damaged and dead tissue.
➢Cleaning of the wound, with at least 3 litres of fluid depending on the degree of 
contamination (‘the solution to pollution is dilution’)
➢Intravenous antibiotics
➢Stabilization of the fracture to realign the bones to their anatomical position. 
➢Depending on the degree of contamination and soft tissue coverage, this may be by 
definitive or temporary fixation. 
➢Temporary external fixators are often attached by means of pins to the bones 
either side of the fracture site to allow access to the wound while imparting 
stability.

Operative 
Treatment
• This involves the use of devices that are 
broadly divided into those that remain 
external to the skin and those that are 
internal (screws, plates and nails).