Definition
• Shock exists when tissue oxygen delivery fails to meet the metabolic requirements of 
cells.
• An imbalance between oxygen delivery (DO2) and oxygen demand can result from a 
global reduction in oxygen delivery, maldistribution of blood flow, impaired oxygen 
utilization or an increase in tissue oxygen requirements. 
• Left unchecked, shock will result in a fall in oxygen consumption (VO2), anaerobic 
metabolism, tissue acidosis and cellular dysfunction leading to multiple organ 
dysfunction and ultimately death. 
• Shock is sometimes considered to be synonymous with hypotension.

Types of Shock
Hypovolaemic shock
This is probably the commonest and most readily corrected cause of shock encountered in 
surgical practice and results from a reduction in intravascular volume secondary to the loss 
of blood , plasma or water and electrolytes
Cardiogenic shock
This occurs when the heart is unable to maintain a cardiac output sufficient to meet the 
metabolic requirements of the body (pump failure) and can be caused by MI, arrhythmias, 
valve dysfunction, cardiac tamponade, massive pulmonary embolism, and tension 
pneumothorax
Neurogenic shock
This is caused by a loss of sympathetic tone to vascular smooth muscle. 
This typically occurs following injury to the (thoracic or cervical) spinal cord and results in profound 
vasodilation, a fall in systemic vascular resistance and hypotension.

Septic shock
▪ Septic shock results from complex disturbances in DO2 delivery and VO2  and can be defined as: 
Sepsis-induced hypotension (systolic BP < 90 mmHg, mean arterial blood pressure [MAP] < 70 mmHg) and/ or tissue 
hypoperfusion (elevated lactate or oliguria) that persist despite adequate fluid resuscitation (~30 ml/kg).
▪ Bacteria: Sepsis usually arises from a localized infection, with Gram-ve (38%) and (increasingly) Gram +ve (52%).
▪ The commonest sites of infection leading to sepsis are the lungs (50–70%), abdomen (20–25%), urinary tract (7–10%) 
and skin.
Infection → Cytokine-mediated proinflammatory response → NO SYNTHESIS → Peripheral vasodilation 
(VD),,,INITIAL RESPONSE,,, → Redistribution of blood flow, endothelial cell activation → Endothelial cell damage → 
Increased vascular permeability → Capillary leak →  Extravasation of fluid into the interstitial space  → Haemoconcentration within 
the capillary → Platelet aggregation →  Increase in blood viscosity → Formation of microthrombi within the 
microcirculation.,,,,2ry RESPONSE,,,,

Anaphylactic shock
Definition: This is a severe systemic hypersensitivity reaction following exposure to an allergen triggering the release of 
vasoactive mediators (histamine, kinins and PG) from basophils and mast cells.
Anaphylaxis may be:
  1-Immunologically mediated (allergic anaphylaxis), when IgE, IgG or complement activation 
  2-Non-immunologically mediated (non-allergic anaphylaxis). 
Common causes of anaphylaxis include:  
   1-Drugs (e.g. NM blocking drugs, β-lactam antibiotics)
  2-Colloid solutions (e.g. dextrans)
  3-Radiological contrast media
  4-Food stuffs (peanuts, dairy products). 
Allergen → Vasoactive mediators → VD →  Intravascular volume Redistribution →  
Capillary leak →  Reduction in cardiac output → Anaphylactic shock

Pathophysiology
A) Macrocirculation
• When assessing a patient with shock, it is useful to remember that mean arterial blood 
pressure (MAP) is equal to the product of cardiac output (CO) and systemic vascular 
resistance (SVR).

1-Catecholamine release from the adrenal medulla 
and sympathetic nerve endings.
2-Generation of  angiotensin-II (AT-II) from the renin–
angiotensin system.
1-The resulting tachycardia and increased myocardial contractility act to preserve COP
2-VC acts to maintain BP and divert the available blood to vital organs (e.g. brain, heart and muscle) and 
away from non-vital organs (e.g. skin and gut). 
In Hypovolaemic Shock 
Hypovolaemic Shock → →
Tachycardia + Increased 
myocardial contractility act to 
preserve COP + VC

In septic shock
DO2 and VO2 is compromised at the cellular level.
However, as septic shock progresses endothelial dysfunction results in significant extravasation of fluid and a loss 
of intravascular volume. 
Ventricular dysfunction also impairs the compensatory increase in COP.
 As a result, peripheral perfusion falls and the clinical signs may become indistinguishable from those associated 
with the low-output state described above
• The (initial) cardiovascular response is a reflex tachycardia and an increase in SV resulting in an 
increased COP. 
• Clinically this manifests as warm, well-perfused peripheries, a low diastolic BP and raised pulse 
pressure.

In Neurogenic Shock
Traumatic disruption of 
sympathetic efferent 
nerve fibres results in 
loss of vasomotor tone, 
peripheral VD and a fall 
in  SVR.
Loss of cardiac accelerator 
fibres (T1–4) and anhidrosis as a 
result of loss of sweat gland 
innervation also frequently 
occur, with patients typically 
presenting with hypotension, 
bradycardia and warm, dry 
peripheries. 
Typically presents with signs of a low output state although, unlike hypovolaemic shock, circulating 
volume is typically normal or increased with increased circulating AT-II and aldosterone.
 If associated with left ventricular failure, there may be pulmonary oedema.
In Cardiogenic Shock

B) Cellular Function 
Glycolysis (ATP Synthesis from glucose)
Aerobic Pathway
Under normal (aerobic) conditions, 
glycolysis converts glucose to pyruvate 
which is converted to acetyl-coenzyme-A 
(acetyl-CoA) and enters the Krebs cycle.
Oxidation of acetyl-CoA in the Krebs cycle 
generates nicotinamide adenine Dinucleotide 
(NADH) and flavine adenine dinucleotide (FADH2 
), which enter the electron transport chain and 
are oxidized to NAD+ in the oxidative 
phosphorylation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to ATP .
The oxidative metabolism of glucose is 
energy efficient, yielding up to 38 moles 
of ATP for each mole of glucose, but 
requires a continuous supply of oxygen to 
the cell. 
38 ATP

Anaerobic Pathway
Hypoxaemia blocks mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, inhibiting ATP 
synthesis. 
This leads to a decrease in the intracellular ATP/ADP ratio, an increase in the 
NADH/ NAD+ ratio and an accumulation of pyruvate that is unable to enter the 
Krebs cycle. 
The cytosolic conversion of pyruvate to lactate allows the regeneration of some 
NAD+, enabling the limited production of ATP by anaerobic glycolysis. However, 
anaerobic glycolysis is significantly less efficient, generating only 2 moles of ATP 
per mole of glucose and predisposing cells to ATP depletion

The effect (Complications) of shock on individual
organ systems

Management
General principles
The management of shock is based upon the following 
principles:
 1- Identification and treatment of the underlying cause 
2- The maintenance of adequate tissue oxygen delivery.
3-As with most clinical emergencies, treatment and diagnosis 
should occur simultaneously with the immediate assessment and 
management following an Airway, Breathing, Circulation (ABC) 
approach.
4- The early recognition and treatment of potentially reversible 
causes (e.g. bleeding, intra-abdominal sepsis, myocardial 
ischaemia, pulmonary embolus, cardiac tamponade) is essential 
and may be facilitated thorough clinical examination (Table) and 
focused investigations.
5-Most patients with shock will require admission to (ICU).

Airway Management
OXYGEN:
Hypoxaemia must be prevented and, if present, rapidly corrected by maintaining a clear airway (e.g. 
head tilt, chin lift) and administering high flow oxygen.
ABG Monitoring:
The adequacy of this therapy can be estimated continuously using pulse-oximetry (SpO2), but 
frequent arterial blood gas analysis allows a more accurate assessment of oxygenation (Pa.O2), 
ventilation (Pa.CO2) and indirect measures of tissue perfusion (pH, base excess, HCO3 and lactate). 
MV:
In patients with severe hypoxaemia, cardiovascular instability, depressed conscious level or 
exhaustion, intubation and ventilatory support may be required.

Circulatory Support
FLUIDS 
▪ Initial resuscitation should be targeted at arresting haemorrhage and 
providing fluid (crystalloid or colloid) to restore intravascular volume 
and optimize cardiac preload. 
▪ It is common practice to use blood to maintain a haemoglobin 
concentration > 10 g/dl during the initial resuscitation of shock if there is 
evidence of low central venous saturations (measured from a central venous 
catheter). 
‘Fluid responsiveness’ 
  Tachycardia,    BP, and improving peripheral perfusion and urine output in 
response to a series of 250–500 ml fluid challenges indicate ‘fluid 
responsiveness’ and suggest that further fluid and optimization of preload 
may be required.

Inotropes and/or Vasopressors
Once parameters stop improving it is unlikely 
that further fluid will be beneficial, particularly 
if there is an associated fall in oxygen 
saturation and the development of pulmonary 
oedema. 
• As more invasive monitoring allows the 
acid–base status, central venous pressure 
(CVP), pulmonary artery wedge pressure 
(PAWP), CO and mixed (SvO2) or central to 
be used to further assess the response to fluid 
(Fig).
• If blood pressure remains low and/or signs of 
inadequate tissue oxygen delivery persist 
despite fluid resuscitation and the 
optimization of preload, then inotropes 
and/or vasopressors may be required.
•  Vasopressors (e.g. noradrenaline) cause 
peripheral vasoconstriction and an increase 
SVR.
•  Inotropes (e.g. dobutamine) increase 
myocardial contractility, stroke volume and 
cardiac output.

Choice of Inotrope or Vasopressor
• The initial choice of inotrope or 
vasopressor therefore depends upon the 
underlying aetiology of shock and an 
understanding of the main physiological 
derangements (Table). 
• Adrenaline, which has both 
vasopressor and inotropic effects, is a 
useful first line drug in the emergency 
treatment of shock.

Management of Hypovolaemic shock
• The commonest cause of acute hypovolaemic shock in surgical 
practice is bleeding due to trauma, ruptured aortic aneurysm, 
obstetric haemorrhage.
• Normal adult blood volume is about 7% of body weight, with a 70 kg 
man having an estimated blood volume (EBV) of around 5000 ml. 
• The severity of haemorrhagic shock is frequently classified according 
to percentage of EBV lost where class I (< 15%) represents a 
compensated state (as may occur following the donation of a unit of 
blood) and class IV (> 40%) is immediately life threatening (Table).
• The term ‘
M
assive 
 H
aemorrhage
 ’ has a number of 
definitions including: 
Loss of EBV in 24 hours; 
Loss of 50% EBV in 3 hours
Blood loss at a rate ≥ 150 ml/min.
• Arrest of haemorrhage and intravascular fluid resuscitation should 
occur concurrently; there is little role for inotropes or vasopressors 
in the treatment of a hypotensive hypovolaemic patient.

Types of Fluids
• The type of fluid used (crystalloid or colloid) is probably less important than the adequate 
restoration of circulating volume itself. 
• In the case of life-threatening or continued haemorrhage, blood will be required early in the 
resuscitation. 
• Ideally, fully cross-matched packed red blood cells (PRBCs) should be administered, but type-
specific or O Rhesus-negative blood may be used until it becomes available. 
• A haemoglobin concentration of 7–9 g/dl may be sufficient to ensure adequate tissue oxygen 
delivery in stable (non-bleeding) patients, but a haemoglobin target of > 10 g/dl may be more 
appropriate in actively bleeding patients.
• Massive transfusion can lead to hypothermia, hypocalcaemia, hyper-or hypokalaemia and 
coagulopathy.

Coagulopathy
• The acute coagulopathy of trauma (ACoT) is well recognized 
and multifactorial: 
Dilution of  clotting factors and platelets as a result of  fluid 
resuscitation, combined with their consumption at the point 
of  bleeding, results in clotting factor deficiency, 
thrombocytopaenia and coagulopathy.
•
 Hypothermia, metabolic acidosis and 
 hypocalcaemia  also 
significantly impair normal coagulation.
• Resuscitation strategies aggressively targeting the ‘lethal triad’ 
of hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy appear to 
significantly improve outcome.

Correction of 
Coagulopathy 
• Where possible, correction of coagulopathy should be guided by 
laboratory results (platelet count, prothrombin time, activated partial 
thromboplastin time and fibrinogen concentration). 
• Clotting factor deficiency is normally treated by the administration of 
fresh frozen plasma (FFP) (10–15 ml/ kg)
• Fibrinogen deficiency (< 1.0 g/l) is best treated with fresh frozen 
plasma or cryoprecipitate (usually one ‘pool’ of 10 single donor units). 
• Thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction by the administration of 
platelets (usually one ‘pool’ or adult dose containing 2–3 × 1011 
platelets).
• The antifibrinolytic, tranexamic acid, can be used to inhibit 
fibrinolysis and has been shown to reduce mortality from bleeding 
when used early (< 3 hours) and empirically following major trauma.

Correction of 
Coagulopathy 
• In the case of rapid haemorrhage, it is often not possible to use 
traditional laboratory results to guide the correction of coagulopathy 
because of the time delay in obtaining these results.
•  This has lead to a formula-driven approach to the use of P-RBC, 
FFP and platelets targeting the early empirical treatment of 
coagulopathy.
• Administration of warmed PRBC and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 
in a 1:1 ratio as soon as possible in the resuscitation of major 
haemorrhage following trauma in conjunction with platelet 
transfusions to maintain platelets > 100 × 109.
• A recombinant form of activated factor VII (rVIIa) is approved for 
the management of bleeding in haemophiliacs with inhibitory 
antibodies to factors VIII or IX.