Combined Effects of Drugs
• A combination of two or more drugs can result in an increase
or a decrease in response.
• Increased response:
1. Additive effect
2. Potentiation (supra-additive)
3. Synergism

1. Additive Effect 
The combined effect of two or more drugs is equal to the sum
of their individual effect.
Effect of drugs A + B = Effect of drug A + Effect of drug B 
(1+1=2)
For example, ibuprofen and paracetamol as analgesic.

2. Potentiation (supra-additive)
The enhancement of action of one drug by another drug that is inactive
is called potentiation.
Effect of drugs A + B > Effect of drug A + Effect of drug B 
(1+1 > 2)
For example, levodopa + carbidopa
Carbidopa inhibits the breakdown of levodopa; thus, enhancing its
effects.

• When two or more drugs are administered 
simultaneously, their combined effect is greater than that 
elicited by either drug alone.
• For example, 
sulphamethoxazole + trimethoprim
3. Synergism

Decreased response (Drug Antagonism)
• In antagonism, the effect of one drug is decreased or 
abolished in the presence of another drug.
1. Physical antagonism: 
The opposing action of the two drugs is due to their physical 
property, e.g., activated charcoal adsorbs toxic substances in 
poisoning.

2. Chemical antagonism:
The opposing action of the two drugs is due to their chemical 
property,
 e.g., antacids are weak bases that neutralize gastric acid; 
Chelating agents are complex metals and are useful in heavy 
metal poisoning.

3. Physiological (functional) antagonism: 
• Here, two drugs act at different receptors or by different mechanisms on 
the same physiological system and produce opposite effects.
•  For example,
✓ insulin and glucagon on blood sugar, 
✓adrenaline, and histamine on bronchial smooth muscle.
✓histamine produces bronchoconstriction (via histamine receptors), 
whereas adrenaline produces bronchodilatation by acting through 
adrenergic
 (2) receptors—hence adrenaline helps to reverse bronchospasm in 
anaphylactic shock.

4. Receptor Antagonism 
The antagonist binds to the same receptor as the agonist and 
inhibits its effects. 
It can be competitive or non-competitive

a. Competitive Antagonism (equilibrium type):
• In competitive antagonism, both agonist and 
the antagonist bind reversibly to the same site 
on the receptor. 
• This type of antagonism can be overcome 
(reversible) by increasing the concentration of 
agonist. 
• The log dose-response curve of the agonist 
shows a rightward parallel shift in the presence 
of a competitive antagonist

Competitive antagonism
• The log dose-response curve of the 
agonist shows a rightward parallel 
shift in the presence of a competitive 
antagonist

b. Noncompetitive antagonism:
• The antagonist binds to a different site on the receptor and prevents 
the agonist from interacting with the receptor.
•  In this type, the antagonistic effect cannot be overcome by 
increasing the concentration of the agonist. 
• There is a flattening of the dose-response curve (DRC) in 
noncompetitive antagonism, e.g. diazepam and bicuculline