The cardiovascular system includes:
1 -the heart, which serves as a pump for the blood.
2- the blood vessels, which transport the blood throughout the body
The heart consists of two separate pumps:
1- The right side pump.
➢pumps blood to the lungs through the pulmonary circulation so that gas exchange.
2- The left side pump. 
➢pumps blood to the rest of the body tissues 
through the systemic circulation
Notes:
The right side pump… deoxyenated blood
 The left side pump…. oxygenated blood

Functional anatomy of the heart
To function mechanically as a pump, the heart must have:
Receiving chambers: 
The atria (singular: atrium) are the chambers that receive the blood returning to 
the heart through the veins
Delivery chambers:
 The blood then moves to the ventricles of the heart, or the delivery chambers
Valves: 
Valves ensure the one-way, or forward, flow of the blood.
Atrioventricular valves: Between atria and ventricles (Tricuspid valve and mitral 
valve).
Semilunar valves: At the start of the arteries that come  from the heart. (pulmonary 
valve and aortic valve)

Tricuspid
valve 
Types of valves
Mitral
valve
Pulmonary
valve 
Aortic 
valve

-The closure of the valves causes the “lub-dub” associated with the heartbeat.
-The first heart sound, or the “lub,” occurs when the ventricles contract and the AV 
valves close (closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves).
-The second heart sound, or the “dub,” occurs when the
ventricles relax and the semilunar valves close (closure of the pulmonary valve and aortic valve
Heart sound

The wall of the heart has three layers:
1. Epicardium (The outermost layer).
3. Myocardium (The middle layer). (muscular layer) 
2. Endocardium (The innermost layer).
How the heart contract?
-When the action potential reaches cells.
- This stimulates the release of Ca2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
 -Ca2+ promotes the interaction of actin and myosin → contraction

Electrical activity of the heart
Conducting system
The specialized excitation and electrical conduction system in the heart consists
of the following:
➢Sinoatrial (SA) node (the pacemaker)
➢Atrioventricular (AV) node
➢ AV Bundle (Bundle of His)
➢Bundle branches
➢Purkinje fibers

Physiological properties of heart
1-Automaticity:
-It is the ability of the heart to generate electrical stimulus
-generated from sinoatrial node (SAN)
2-Rhythmicity:
It is the ability of the heart to beat regularly (72beat/min).
3-Contractility:
It is the ability of the heart to contract and push blood into the circulation.
4-Excitability:
It is the ability of the cardiac muscle to respond to electrical stimulus by 
contraction.
5-Conductivity:
It is the ability of the cardiac muscle to conduct electrical stimulus from one part 
of the heart to another by way of conducting system.

Cardiac cycle
A-Diastole:
1- Blood collected in the atria
2- (S-A node) sends out an electrical signal that causes the atria to contract.
 3-This contraction pushes blood into the resting.ventricles
B-Systole:
1- Ventricles are full of blood 
2- The electrical signals from the S-A node travel along a pathway of cells to the ventricles 
through A-V node, bundle of His and Purkinje fibers 
3- Causing them to contract and push the blood through the pulmonary and aortic valves.
SystoleDiastole

There are two loads on left ventricle during the cycle: 
preload and afterload
Preload After load
The load that makes the ventricular 
muscles at its maximum length, 
Occurs at the end of the diastole
amount of resistance the heart must 
overcome to open the aortic valve and 
push the blood volume out into the 
systemic circulation
It depends on the volume of blood 
collected in the atrium (called venous 
return)
- It depends on the resistance of the 
arteries to blood pumping from 
ventricles (called peripheral resistance)