Module 
Module Unit: - Gastro Intestinal Tract 
                  Module Title: - liver dialysis 
       Liver dialysis : is a temporary, artificial, extracorporeal detoxification 
treatment for severe liver failure that cleans the blood of toxic, protein -bound 
substances (such as bile acids and ammonia) when the liver can no longer do 
so. It acts as a "bridge" to support the patient, allowing the liver to recover until 
a transplant can occur.  It operates as a continuous therapy in the ICU for 6 –8 
hours, using a specialized machine to filter blood through an albumin -rich 
dialysate, which is then regenerated, allowing the body to recover while 
awaiting a transplant.  
Unlike kidney dialysis which removes water and small solutes, Liver 
Dialysis must remove protein-bound toxins (like bilirubin and bile acids) 
and ammonia. 
• Purpose:  
• To support the liver by "cleaning" the blood to improve neurological status 
(Hepatic Encephalopathy) and allow the liver time to regenerate or bridge the 
patient to a transplant. 
• Types of Liver Dialysis 
1- The Molecular Adsorbent Recirculating System (MARS) : the best 
extracorporeal liver dialysis system in the medical world. Two separate 
dialysis circuits are used in the MARS blood purification system. MARS is 
a widely used liver dialysis technique but rarely used in developing countries 
due to its complicated technique and high cost.

2-  Single Pass Albumin Dialysis (SPAD): a simple albumin dialysis technique 
as it uses standard renal replacement therapy machines without the 
interruption of additional perfusion pump systems like MARS.

Nursing Action Rationale 
Pre-Procedure 
Assessment  
Neurological Baseline: use the Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GCS). 
Liver failure causes 
ammonia buildup, 
leading to confusion or 
coma 
Coagulation Profile: check INR, PT, and platelets. Patients with liver failure 
have a high risk of 
bleeding  
Vascular Access: Ensure a large-bore double-lumen 
catheter (usually internal jugular) is patent. 
Observe for any 
inflammation signs as 
swelling, tenderness. 
Prepare and check the main c ircuits (blood or patient, 
albumin, and dialysis) and explain the procedure to the 
patient if conscious or to his family 
 
During session   
        Continuous Monitoring for  
• Blood pressure (hypotension is common) 
• Heart rate 
• Oxygen saturation 
• Level of consciousness 
Observe for complications as bleeding: 
• Catheter site, gums , nose 
• Bruising 
Machine-related problems: 
• Air bubbles 
• Clotting 
• Alarms

Monitor anticoagulation therapy and document 
all medications given during dialysis. 
Post- dialysis nursing care  
Reassess:  
• Vital signs (specially, blood pressure and 
temperature ) 
• Mental status improvement 
    Inspecting catheter site 
    Follow up post-dialysis lab results 
  Documentation: 
• Duration of session 
• Complications 
• Patient response 
Liver dialysis can cause 
heat loss, leading to 
shivering, which 
increases metabolic 
demand on an already 
stressed liver.

Module 
Module Unit: - Renal Procedures 
 
Module Title: - Renal dialysis  
 
 
Definition: a life-sustaining treatment for end -stage kidney failure that removes 
waste, toxins, and excess fluid from the blood when kidneys can no longer function  
 
Types of Dialysis: 
• Hemodialysis: Blood is pumped out of the body, filtered through a dialyzer 
(artificial kidney) machine, and returned. Usually done 3 times a week for 
3–5 hours per session. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Peritoneal Dialysis: A cleaning solution (dialysate) is instilled into 
the abdomen via a catheter, allowing waste to be filtered directly inside the 
body.

Indications of hemodialysis:  
• Acute kidney injury 
• Uremic encephalopathy 
• Pericarditis 
• Life-threatening hyperkalemia 
• Hypervolemia causing end-organ complications (e.g., pulmonary edema) 
Contraindications of hemodialysis: 
Absolute contraindication to hemodialysis is the inability to secure vascular access, and relative 
contraindications include: 
• Difficult vascular access 
• Needle phobia 
• Cardiac failure 
• Coagulopathy 
 
Complications 
The most common complications associated with hemodialysis are: 
• Intradialytic hypotension 
• Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome: This is more common in patients during or soon after 
their first treatment. It is a clinical syndrome characterized by neurologic deterioration, 
restlessness, mental confusion, headache, occasional muscle twitching, and coma.  
• Hemolysis 
• Air embolism 
Nursing action Rationale 
  
Pre hemodialysis session 
Assess vital signs  To establish a "hemodynamic baseline" and ensure the 
patient is stable enough to tolerate the stress of fluid 
removal  
Auscultate lung sounds To detect pulmonary congestion and guide fluid 
removal (ultrafiltration)  
Monitor lab investigations as blood 
urea, creatinine,  sodium,  potassium, 
calcium, albumin and hemoglobin.  
to evaluate the severity of uremic toxicity and 
electrolyte imbalances, albumin marker for 
nutritional status and "oncotic pressure , hemoglobin

to assess for anemia which is common in renal 
patients. 
Check for holding any antihypertensive 
medications  
To prevent severe intradialytic hypotension 
  Observe any inflammation signs as: 
✓ Localized erythema 
✓ Swelling  
✓ Tenderness  
✓ Pain in the access arm 
To detect early signs of infection or thrombosis to 
prevent systemic sepsis and preserve the life-sustaining 
vascular access  
   Observe site of access for any 
abnormalities as: 
✓ Vascular swelling  
✓ Redness around puncture site  
✓ Aneurysm 
To ensure the integrity and patency of the vascular 
access to prevent life -threatening complications and 
ensure a successful treatment 
  Prepare hemodialysis machine, dialyzer, 
dialysate and supplies 
 
   During hemodialysis session   
Following aseptic technique during 
cannulation procedure as 
➢ Perform hand hygiene 
➢ Wearing PPE  
➢ Appling skin antiseptic solution 
appropriately 
➢ Allow skin antiseptic solution to dry  
➢ No contact with fistula/ graft’s site 
(after disinfection) 
➢ Perform cannulation aseptically by 
avoiding touch needle  
➢ Cover puncture site with sterile 
dressing  
➢ Insert needles in vascular access  
➢ Remove gloves 
➢ Perform hand hygiene

Assess vital signs especially blood 
pressure every 30 minutes  
  To detect and manage intradialytic hypotension early, 
and ensuring patient safety during rapid fluid shifts 
Observe any hemodialysis complications 
as: 
➢ Hypotension  
➢ Hypertension 
➢ Hypoglycemia 
➢ Hyperglycemia 
➢  Leg cramps  
➢ Febrile reaction  
➢ Dysrhythmia  
➢ Bleeding at the access site 
➢ Monitor patient for disequilibrium 
syndrome: 
✓ Nausea  
✓ Vomiting   
✓ Restlessness  
✓ Headache   
✓ Seizures 
 
 Observe Vascular access patency  
➢ Uncovered during hemodialysis 
session  
➢ Don’t sleep on access arm  
➢ Avoid using the patient’s dialysis 
access arm for administering I.V. 
   
     To ensure continuous blood flow and prevent 
clotting

medications, taking BP, or blood 
sample 
  Post- dialysis nursing care  
 Following aseptic technique during 
decannulation procedure as: 
➢ Hand hygiene  
➢ Wearing PPE 
➢ Remove needles aseptically and 
compress the site of insertion by 
sterile dressing  
➢ Disinfect site of puncture  
➢ Cover the site of puncture with 
sterile gauze or dressing  
➢ Removing gloves  
➢ Perform hand hygiene 
  
Assess vital signs 
Auscultate lung sounds  To confirm that the lungs are clear and the fluid 
removal was successful. And to ensure that patient is 
leaving the session without any remaining fluid 
congestion. 
Monitor lab investigations as blood urea, 
creatinine,  sodium,  potassium, calcium, 
albumin and hemoglobin. 
 To confirm the treatment was effective and ensure 
that waste products and electrolytes have reached safe, 
stable levels 
Instructions given to patients for 
vascular access maintenance as: 
✓ Avoid wearing tight clothes at 
vascular access arm. 
✓ Avoid carrying heavy weight at 
vascular access arm. 
✓ Avoid measuring blood pressure 
from vascular access arm. 
✓ Avoid laying on vascular access 
arm. 
✓ Others 
 
Discard all equipment and supplies in 
special places