Medical Surgical Nursing Clinical
Procedures
Second Term
Prepared by
Medical Surgical Nursing Department 2025/2026

Table of Contents
Serial Topic Page No
I Gastro intestinal Tract
● Colostomy Care and Colostomy
Irrigation https://youtu.be/cwaz-v4-N4g
https://youtu.be/m6UMElGvd0U
7
● Liver dialysis
● Liver Biopsy
https://youtu.be/
tKjxMw81L2k
25
● Paracentesis https://
youtu.be/O8wOhjFOW5A
32
● Endoscopy procedure 41
II Orthopedic procedures 52
● Cast Procedure https://
youtu.be/PM_fwwVTuXs
https://youtu.be/
1nRJo86imH8
52
● Traction Procedure https://
youtu.be/E48BdevYnTI
62
III Burn wound care 71
● Wound hydrotherapy
https://youtu.be/
l_jbLugZfBk
74
● Wound debridement 77
● Wound dressing 80
IV Neurologic Procedure 88
● Lumbar puncture https://
youtu.be/5vejEe-ShlI
88
V Renal Procedure 98
● Renal dialysis
● Renal Biopsy https://
youtu.be/kIqTBW3Vcc8
98

Faculty of Nursing
Vision and Mission 2025-2026
Vision:-
To address health and technical concerns at the local, national, and regional
levels as well as hygiene, the medical surgical nursing department will establish
an innovative academic Centre for education, practice, research, and community
services.
Mission :-
To develop a capable student who can compete at the local, national, and
regional levels and who is motivated to learn new things and do scientiﬁc
research. The student should also be qualiﬁed to provide comprehensive nursing
care for a variety of medical surgical nursing specialties.
Target
1.Raising the eﬃciency of the institutional capacity to improve the competitive position of the
college.
2.Excellence in teaching and learning to increase the competitiveness of college students.
3.Developing and supporting scientiﬁc research and focusing it on community service.
4.Expansion of community service and environmental development.
Strategic Plan
The Medical Surgical Nursing Department strategic plan is a living document that
guides the work of RST. The purpose of the plan is to focus all RST initiatives on
achieving RST mission of commitment to quality patient care through professional
development, certiﬁcation, scholarship, and advocacy.

Goal I:
RST Nurse will be a well-equipped, highly respected professional with career
satisfaction and a strong professional identity.
Objectives:
1. Increase the competency and capability of the medical-surgical nurse at all
levels of their career.
2. Increase career satisfaction among medical-surgical nurses.
3. Increase the professional identity of med-surg nurses.
Goal 2:
The global healthcare community will look to RST as the thought leader on all aspects
of med-surg nursing practice through advocacy, education, certiﬁcation, and
scholarship.
Objectives:
1. Increase acknowledgement of med-surg nursing as a specialty.
2. Increase the proﬁle of the med-surg nurse as a healthcare leader.
3. Increase recognition of RST as an education authority on topics related to med-surg
nursing.
4. Increase promotion of the value of certiﬁcation as a hallmark of expertise.
5. Increase scholarship on issues relevant to med-surg nursing through research
activities.
Goal 3:
RST shapes the ﬁeld of medical-surgical nursing through a diverse workforce and
equitable opportunities for all nurses.
Objectives:
1. Demonstrate a commitment to increasing diversity, inclusion, and equity within the
organization.

2. Increase medical-surgical nursing’s focus on SDOH (social determinants of health)
and implement strategies to promote health equity.
3. Increase competence in med-surg nurses to improve patient care and practice
environments.
4. Increase med-surg nurses’ ability to lead in their communities.
5. Increase med-surg nurses’ ability to apply evidence-based practice and research, in
their day-to-day practices for better patient outcomes.
Goal 4:
RST health and continued organizational growth will be advanced through the effective
integration of products, programs, technology, systems, and people.
Objectives:
1. Improve member experience and engagement.
2. Engage current membership to increase volunteer capabilities, opportunities, and
leadership succession.
3. Develop and implement an effective governance structure and associated processes.
Responsibilities of Students in Clinical Lab: -
● Review the skills to be practiced and/or demonstrated as well as having read
the assigned chapters by your instructor prior to lab attendance.
● Gather and return the equipment used for skill performance.
● Inform instructor when unable to locate equipment, supplies or resources.
● Handle simulators and equipment with care and respect.
● Follow safety measures at all times.
● Maintain cleanliness of the area.
● Dispose of sharps appropriately.

● Demonstrate respect and consideration for self and others.
● All students should display professional conduct.
● Allow others the opportunity to practice.
● Inform instructor if supplies are running low.
● Any damage or malfunction of mannequins or equipment should be reported to
the lab faculty immediately.

Course Content
Page Content
1 Vision
2 Mission
3 Target
4 Strategic plan
5 Responsibilities of Students in
Clinical Lab
6 Gastrointestinal Tract
7 Orthopedic procedures
8 Burn wound care
9 Neurologic Procedure
10 Renal Procedure

1. Demonstrate procedure of colostomy care and assist in liver,
renal biopsy technique
2. Identify principles of aseptic technique
3. Identify types of liver and renal biopsy.
4. Demonstrate procedure of dressing technique, how to prepare
package and dressing care regarding burn wound
5. Identify types of cast and traction
6. Deﬁne hydrotherapy & debridement
7. Perform nursing care in endoscopic procedure
8. Identify the nursing implication in medical procedures as liver
and renal biopsy
1. Topics outlines:
*Gastrointestinal Tract
●Nasogastric Tube insertion and care” gavage
●Colostomy Care and Colostomy Irrigation
●Liver Biopsy
●Paracentesis
●Endoscopy procedure
*Burn wound care
● Wound hydrotherapy
● Wound debridement
● Wound dressing
*Orthopedic procedures
● Cast Procedure
● Traction Procedure
*Neurological procedures
● Lumbar puncture
*Renal Procedure

● Renal Biopsy
2.Teaching strategies:
1- Audiovisual aids: - Models, Equipment.
2- Demonstration.
3- Guided practice in laboratory and clinical/hospital settings.
2. Videos
3.Evaluation methods:
1- Clinical evaluation
2- Case studies.
The ﬁnal grade in the course is based on the following.
4.Case study: - two case studies are required per semester, one of
which should be presented by the student during a class or clinical
conference.
5.Final clinical assessment:
1- The ﬁnal clinical examination should be done in the last two
weeks of the semester.
2- The case should be chosen at the beginning of the examination day.
3- Cases selected for the examination should be from medical
and surgical units.

Module Unit: - Elimination
Module Title: - Colostomy Care and Colostomy Irrigation Time
Allocated: - one hour theory / 30 Minute clinical practice
(Demonstration and return demonstration)
Objectives:
●Integrate ethical, legal, sociocultural, and professional standard when providing care
to patients with colostomy.
● Implements standardized protocol and guidelines when
providing nursing care for patients with colostomy.
● Utilize critical thinking skills and clinical competences needed
when providing nursing care to patients with colostomy.
● Describe the responsibilities of the nurse
in meeting the psychological needs of the
patients with colostomy.
● Develop a teaching plan for patients with colostomy.
● Manage time effectively and set priorities.
● Conducts appropriate nursing activities skillfully
and in accordance with best evidence-based
practice.
● Communicate effectively with all staff
members in inter- professional context to
improve patient's outcomes.
● Convey a positive attitude toward other team members while
working with patients with colostomy.
Teaching and Learning Activities:
a)Oral Presentation.
b) Group participation
c)Demonstration and return demonstration of colostomy care.
d) Using videos related topic.

Outlines:
●Deﬁnition of colostomy& colostomy irrigation.

● Purposes of colostomy care and colostomy irrigation.
●Equipment needed for colostomy care and colostomy irrigation.
●Steps of colostomy care procedure and colostomy irrigation
●Identify Characteristics of healthy Stoma.
●Explain complications of colostomy.
Key terms: -
1) Colostomy: - The surgically created opening of the
colon (large intestine) which results in a stoma.
2) A temporary colostomy (usually transverse) may be raised to
divert the fecal output, thus allowing healing of an anastomosis
further along the colon.
3) Sigmoid or Descending Colostomy: - The most common type of
ostomy surgery, in which the end of the descending or sigmoid colon
is brought to the surface of the abdomen.
4) Transverse colostomy: -
The surgical opening created in the transverse colon resulting in one
or two openings.
5) Ascending Colostomy: - A relatively rare opening in the
ascending portion of the colon. It is located on the right side of the
abdomen.
6) Ileoanal anastomosis: - Technically, it is not an ostomy since
there is no stoma. In this procedure, the colon and most of the
rectum are surgically removed and an internal pouch is formed out
of the terminal portion of the ileum.
7) Colostomy Pouches: - Open-ended pouches are called drainable
and are left attached to the body while emptying. Most commonly
closed end pouches are used by colostomies.
8) Irrigation Systems: - This is done to clean stool directly out of the

Indications of colostomy:
● A blockage
● An injury
● Crohn’s disease, which is an autoimmune form of
inﬂammatory bowel disease
● Colorectal cancer
● Colonic polyps, which is extra tissue growing inside the colon
that may be cancer or may turn into cancer
● Diverticulitis, which occurs when small pouches in digestive
system, called diverticula, become infected or inﬂamed
● Imperforate anus or other birth defects
● Irritable bowel syndrome, which is a condition affecting the
colon that causes diarrhea, bloating, constipation, and pain in
the abdominal area
● Ulcerative colitis, which is an inﬂammatory bowel disease
that causes the long-term inﬂammation of the digestive
tract.
Types of colostomy
1-according to site

Ascending Colostomy
The ascending colostomy is located on the right side of the
abdomen. The discharge is very liquid. A drainable pouch is worn for
colostomies of this type. This type of stoma is rarely used since an
ileostomy is a better stoma when the discharge is liquid. When a
colostomy is located in the right half of the colon, only a short portion
of colon remains.
Transverse Colostomy
The transverse colostomy is in the upper abdomen, either in the
middle or toward the right side of the body. This type of colostomy
allows stools to exit the colon before it reaches the descending colon.
A transverse colostomy may be created for a period of time to
prevent stool from passing through the area of the colon that is
inﬂamed, infected, diseased or newly operated on, thus allowing
healing to occur.
Such a colostomy is usually temporary. Depending on the healing
process, colostomy may be necessary for a few weeks, months, or
even years. Eventually given your good health, the colostomy is likely
to be closed and normal bowel continuity restored.
The discharge from the transverse colostomy is semi-solid, unpredictable and
contains some digestive enzymes. The management of the transverse colostomy
consists of skin protection and a drainable pouch. A closed-end pouch can be used for
convenience during special activities.

Descending colostomy
Located on the lower left side of the abdomen. Generally, the
discharge is ﬁrm and can be regulated. The sigmoid colostomy is
probably the most frequently performed of all the colostomies.
The stool of a descending or sigmoid colostomy is ﬁrmer than
that of the transverse colostomy and does not have the caustic
enzyme content. At this location, elimination may occur on a reﬂex
basis at regular, predictable intervals.

2-According to time
1.Permanent colostomy.
Permanent colostomy Temporary colostomy
A permanent it provides a
mean of elimination when the
end portion of colon, rectum or
anus in nonfunctional and
must be totally removed.
It is created for
elimination when
healing needs to take
place in the case of
trauma or
inﬂammatory
condition of the
bowel.
It used for long term and may
be for long life.
It used for few
weeks, months or
even years.
It will not be closed at any
time.
It will be closed and
normal bowel
continuity is restored.
2.Temporary colostomy.

Types of stomas
There are three types of stomas that can be created for a colostomy:
“loop stoma,” “end stoma,” and “loop-end stoma.”
1- The “end stoma” is one stoma with one opening. To create an
“end stoma” the surgeon brings the open end of the bowel out
through a tiny incision in the abdominal wall, folds it over similar to
a cuff and sutures it down.
2- A loop stoma is one stoma with two different openings. An
entire loop of bowel is brought out through the abdominal surface
through one incision and then opened exposing two pathways into
the bowel: a proximal (functional) opening and a distal
(nonfunctional) opening. The proximal opening expels stool as it
travels down through the bowel and the distal opening allows
mucous to exit the distal or lower portion of the bowel.

3-A double barrel ostomy is a surgical procedure which creates
two end stomas usually in close proximity. The proximal stoma is a
functional opening which expels stool and the distal stoma
functions simply as a mucous ﬁstula.
Colostomy Care
Types of fecal ostomy:
1. Colostomy:
A surgically created opening between the colon & the
abdominal wall to allow fecal elimination. It may be temporary or
permanent diversion.
Colostomy may be placed in any segment of large intestine
(colon), which will inﬂuence the nature of fecal discharge. The more
right sided the colostomy the looser the stool. Transverse and
descending/sigmoid colostomies are the most common types.

2. Ileostomy:
A surgically
created opening between the ileum of the small intestine and
abdominal wall to allow elimination of small bowel eﬄuent. An
ileostomy is usually formed at the terminal ileum of the small bowel
and is usually placed in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen.
Stool from an ileostomy drains frequently (average 4 to 5 times per
day) and contains proteolytic enzymes, which can be harmful to skin.
Purpose of colostomy care:
1.To provide an outlet for intestinal waste product (drainage of
fecal matter).
2.To maintains integrity of stoma and peristomal skin
(skin surrounding stoma)
3.To prevents lesions, ulcerations, excoriation, and other
skin breakdown caused by fecal contaminants
4.To prevents infection
5.To promotes general comfort and positive self-image /self-concept
6.To provides clean ostomy pouch for fecal evacuation
7.To reduces odor from overuse of old pouch.
Equipment:
1- Duplicate wafer and pouch.

2- Washcloth and towel.
3- Tail closure
4- Mild non oily soap (optional)
5- Accessory products prescribed for patient.
Procedure:
Nursing Action Rationale
Preparatory phase:
Have patient assume a relaxed
position and provide privacy. The
best position may be sitting,
reclining, or standing.
Performance phase:
1. To remove pouching system:
a. Wear nonsterile gloves.
b. Push down gently on skin
while lifting up on the wafer
(ostomy adhesive remover may
be used).
c. Discard soiled pouch and
wafer in odor proof plastic bag.
Save tail closure for reuse.
2. To cleans skin:
a. Use toilet tissue to remove
feces from stoma and skin if
needed.
b. Cleans stoma and peristomal
Patient must see stoma site to
learn care.
a. Maintain universal
precautions.
b. Minimizes skin trauma.
c. Removes room odor
and maintain universal
precaution.
2.
a. Stoma may function during
the change.
b. Minimize skin break
down and promotes hygiene.

with or without pouching
system in place. Clip or shave
peristomal hair if appropriate.
c. Rinse and dry skin thoroughly
after cleansing. It is normal for
stoma to bleed slightly during
cleaning and
drying.
c. Remove residue, which may
interfere with adhesion of
wafer.
3. To apply wafer:
a. Use measuring guide or
pattern to determine stoma
size.
b. Trace correct size onto back of
wafer and cut to stoma size. It
is acceptable to cut 1/16- 1/8
inch larger than stoma.
c. Apply a line of skin barrier
paste around stoma or on tip of
wafer opening. Allow to set
according to manufacturer's
instructions.
d. Remove paper backing from
the wafer, center opening over
stoma, and press wafer down
onto peristomal skin
.
4. Snap pouch on to the ﬂange of
water according to
a. This step is omitted when
stomal shrinkage is
complete, about 2 months
postoperatively.
b. Avoids wafer rubbing
stoma; omit this step if the
wafer is precut
c. Extra skin protection is
imperative for ileostomy
and right sided colostomy. A
left sided colostomy may not
need a secondary barrier
because formed stool is
less harmful to skin. Paste
acts as caulking to prevent
undermining of feces.
d. Ensures adherence.
4. If attached properly, there
will be no leakage or odor.

directions.
5. Apply tail closure to pouch tail
Follow up phase:
1. Dispose of plastic bag with
waste materials.
2. Clean drainable pouch with
soap and water; if appropriate.
Drainable pouches may be
reused several times
3. A commercial deodorant can
be placed in the pouch to
reduce odor.
4. Gas can be released from the
pouch by releasing the tail
closure or by snapping off an
area on the pouch ﬂange.
Never make a pinhole in the
pouch to release gas.
5. Proper closure controls odor.
Complies with universal
precautions. Controls odor:
reduces cost.
Destroys the odor proof seal.
Characteristics of healthy Stoma:
1. Stoma is part of intestine (small or large) that is brought above
the abdominal wall to become the outlet for discharge of intestinal
waste.
2. Pink –red.
3. Moist.
4. Bleeds slightly when rubbed.
5. No feeling of touch.

6. Stool functions involuntary.
7. Postoperative swellings gradually decrease over several months.

Complications:
1.Mucocutaneous separation (skin & stoma)
2.Stomal ischemia
3.Stomal stricture or stenosis (long term)
4.Stomal prolapse
5.Peristomal hernia
6.Peristomal skin break down (exposure to fecal output,
allergic reaction, infection).
Procedure
Appliance
 Pouches

Stoma Measuring Guide
 Removing Appliance
Cleaning Stoma
 Measuring Stoma
past the appliance

Cutting Wafer
Colostomy irrigation
A procedure in which a patient with a colostomy ﬂushes the
colon with water, using a tube that is inserted into the stoma (a
surgically created opening in the body that connects an organ or area
inside the body with the outside). This causes the colon to empty and
pass stool through the stoma into a bag. The procedure should be
done at the same time every day. It may allow colostomy patients to
have better control over their bodies.
Purpose:
● To empty the colon of feces, gas, mucus.
● To establish a regular pattern of
evacuation and prevent constipation.
Equipment:
● Irrigating sleeve with belt.
● Water-soluble lubricant.
● Plastic garbage bag.
● Appliance.
● Bedpan or large bowl if the patient is bedbound.

● Soap and warm water, basin, washcloths, and towels.
● Disposable non-sterile gloves, disposable apron.
Procedure:
Step
1. Explain to procedure to the patient/caregiver.
2. Assist the patient to sit on the toilet or in a chair facing the toilet.
3. Fill the irrigation bag with 500 to 1000 ml of water.
4. Flush the tubing with water to empty if of air.
5. Hang up the irrigation bag on the bathroom door hook, or raise the bag 18 inches
above the stoma before irrigation.
6. Take off the pouch and the soiled colostomy bag.
7. Remove any stool or drainage from the stoma with toilet paper.
8. Gently clean with soap and warm water as needed.
9. Place the ring and irrigation sleeve over the stoma and adjust the belt for a snug
ﬁt (a mild soapy solution may be squirted into the sleeve for easier cleaning).
10.Put the bottom of the sleeve into the toilet.
11.Attach the cone tip to the irrigation tubing and lubricate.
12.Gently insert the cone into the stoma for a snug ﬁt. If resistance is met, perform a
lubricated digital exam to remove feces. NEVER use force because this could
perforate the bowel.

13.Open the clamp and let the water ﬂow in over 15 minutes. Press on the cone just
ﬁrmly enough to keep water from running back out. If cramps occur, turn off the
water with the clamp and wait until the cramps subside before proceeding. If the
water backs up into the tubing, shut off the water with the clamp. Wait a few
minutes, then open the clamp and continue irrigation (lower the bag to decrease
the ﬂow and raise the bag to increase the ﬂow of water).
14.Close the bottom of the sleeve with the clamp when most of the water has come
back out (about 10 to 20 minutes).
15.Instruct the patient to walk around if able, for about 30 minutes to complete the
emptying of the bowel.
16. Take off sleeve. Wash around the stoma or shower to remove fecal
drainage. Put on a new pouch.
17. Clean irrigation sleeve, cone tip, and irrigation bag with soap and water. Allow
to air dry, and store them in the patient’s bathroom.
18.Instruct patient/caregiver in procedure. See Patient Education Guidelines for
Colostomy Irrigation.
19.Clean and replace the equipment. Discard disposable items in a trash bag.
20.Document procedure, amount and type of irrigation solution, results of irrigation,
condition of stoma and skin, patient instructions and ability to follow through on
patient visit report.
Note: https://youtu.be/cwaz-v4-N4g https://youtu.be/
m6UMElGvd0U

Follow up activities
1.A patient, who has a colostomy, asks what type of foods they
should avoid to decrease odorous gas. You would tell the patient
to avoid:
A. Onions, alcoholic beverages, eggs, and cabbage
B. Beef, fried foods, lettuce, and rice
C. Apple, pears, nuts, and wheat
D. Potatoes, peas, carrots, and chicken
2. A patient is 2 days post-opt from an ileostomy placement. Which
ﬁnding requires immediate nursing action?
A. The stoma is excreting liquid stool.
B. The patient’s potassium level is 2.0
C. The stoma is bright red and moist.
D. The patient reports mucoid drainage from the anus.
3. Which type of colostomy can allow a patient to have bowel
continence?
A. Descending or Sigmoid Colostomy
B. Ascending or Transverse Colostomy
C. Transverse or Descending Colostomy

D. Ascending or Descending Colostomy
4. The nurse caring for a 2-day postoperative colostomy patient should
report immediately if a stoma is assessed as:
A. beefy and red.
B. having swelling.
C. having a small amount of bleeding around it.
D. blue-tinged.
5. The patient says, “I hate this yucky paste under my appliance. I think
I will just tape it on.” The nurse’s most informative response to this
remark would be which of the following?
A. Taping will not work!
B. Taping will not seal the wafer tight enough to prevent
leakage or ﬁll increases.
C. Taping with waterproof tape is just as effective as the paste.
D. Taping is far more irritating to the skin than the paste would be.
6. The patient comes to the industrial nurse and is frantic because the
stoma to the colostomy has prolapsed after 1 year post surgery. The
nurse’s best counsel would be which of the following?
A. If there are still feces coming from the stoma, it is not blocked.
Contact your surgeon for an evaluation.
B. You must come in immediately, because the stoma may
completely retract into your abdomen.
C. This is an emergency situation, because it has stenosed.
D. Don’t worry about that. Coughing or sneezing might have caused
the prolapse. It will come back out in a few hours.

7. What part of the bowel would a colostomy be placed?
A. Ileum
B. Colon
C. Jejunum
8.When cleaning the skin around the stoma you should use
what kind of soap?
A. Dove
B. Ivory
C. Baby Wash
D. Antibacterial
9. True or False:
A. Patients with an ileostomy are at greater risk for dehydration
and an electrolyte imbalance.
B. An ileostomy is a surgical opening created to bring the large
intestine to the surface of the abdomen

Module
Module Unit: - Gastro Intestinal Tract
Module Title: - liver dialysis
Liver dialysis : is a temporary, artiﬁcial, extracorporeal detoxiﬁcation
treatment for severe liver failure that cleans the blood of toxic, protein-bound
substances (such as bile acids and ammonia) when the liver can no longer do so. It
acts as a "bridge" to support the patient, allowing the liver to recover until a transplant
can occur. It operates as a continuous therapy in the ICU for 6–8 hours, using a
specialized machine to ﬁlter blood through an albumin-rich dialysate, which is then
regenerated, allowing the body to recover while awaiting a transplant. 
Unlike kidney dialysis which removes water and small solutes, Liver Dialysis
must remove protein-bound toxins (like bilirubin and bile acids) and ammonia.
● Purpose:
● To support the liver by "cleaning" the blood to improve neurological status (Hepatic
Encephalopathy) and allow the liver time to regenerate or bridge the patient to a
transplant.
● Types of Liver Dialysis
1- The Molecular Adsorbent Recirculating System (MARS): the best extracorporeal
liver dialysis system in the medical world. Two separate dialysis circuits are
used in the MARS blood puriﬁcation system. MARS is a widely used liver
dialysis technique but rarely used in developing countries due to its
complicated technique and high cost.
2- Single Pass Albumin Dialysis (SPAD): a simple albumin dialysis technique as it
uses standard renal replacement therapy machines without the interruption of
additional perfusion pump systems like MARS.

Nursing Action Rationale
Pre-Procedure
Assessment
Neurological Baseline: use the Glasgow Coma Scale
(GCS).
Liver failure causes
ammonia buildup, leading
to confusion or coma
Coagulation Proﬁle: check INR, PT, and platelets. Patients with liver failure
have a high risk of bleeding

Vascular Access: Ensure a large-bore double-lumen
catheter (usually internal jugular) is patent.
Observe for any
inﬂammation signs as
swelling, tenderness.
Prepare and check the main circuits (blood or
patient, albumin, and dialysis) and explain the
procedure to the patient if conscious or to his
family
During session
Continuous Monitoring for
● Blood pressure (hypotension is common)
● Heart rate
● Oxygen saturation
● Level of consciousness
Observe for complications as bleeding:
● Catheter site, gums , nose
● Bruising
Machine-related problems:
● Air bubbles
● Clotting
● Alarms
Monitor anticoagulation therapy and
document all medications given during
dialysis.
Post- dialysis nursing care
Reassess:
● Vital signs (specially, blood pressure and
temperature )
● Mental status improvement
Inspecting catheter site
Follow up post-dialysis lab results
Documentation:
● Duration of session
Liver dialysis can cause
heat loss, leading to
shivering, which increases
metabolic demand on an
already stressed liver.

Module Title: - liver biopsy
Time Allocated: - one-hour theory / 30 Minute clinical practice.
Objectives:
● Integrate ethical, legal, sociocultural, and professional
standard when providing care to patients with liver
biopsy.
● Implements standardized protocol and guidelines when
providing nursing care for patients with liver biopsy.
● Utilize critical thinking skills and clinical competences needed
when providing nursing care to patients with liver biopsy.
● Describe the responsibilities of the nurse
in meeting the psychological needs of the
patients with liver biopsy.
● Develop a teaching plan for patient with liver biopsy.
● Manage time effectively and set priorities.
● Conducts appropriate nursing activities skillfully
and in accordance with best evidence-based
practice.
● Communicate effectively with all staff
members in inter- professional context
to improve patient's outcomes.
● Convey a positive attitude toward other team members while
working with patients with liver biopsy.
Teaching and Learning Activities:

a)Oral Presentation.
b) Group participation
c)Demonstration and return demonstration of colostomy care.
d) Using videos related topic.

Outlines:
1. Deﬁnition.
2. Indications.
3. Contraindications.
4. Types.
5. Equipment.
6. Procedure.
7. Complications.
Liver Biopsy
Deﬁnition:
Liver biopsy is a diagnostic test, which involves the removal of a
small quantity of tissue from the liver, usually done under local
anesthetic, to allow microscopic examination of the liver.
Indications:
1. Evaluation of abnormal liver biochemical tests and hepatomegaly.
2. Evaluation and staging of chronic hepatitis.
3. Evaluation the type and extent of drug induced liver injury.
4. Identifying and determination of the nature of intrahepatic masses.
5. Diagnosis of multisystem inﬁltrative disease.
6. Evaluation the effectiveness of the therapies for liver disease.
7. Evaluation of liver test abnormalities following transplantation.
Contraindications
● Absolute
- History of un explained bleeding
- Prothrombin time < 3-4s over control
- Platelets > 60.000/mm
3
.
- Prolonged bleeding time ≥ 10 min.
- Un availability of blood transfusion support.

- Suspected hemangioma.
- Uncooperative patients.
● Relative
- Ascites.
- Infections in right pleural cavity.
- Infection below right diaphragm.
- Morbid obesity.
Types of liver biopsy:
● Percutaneous liver biopsy
- Ultrasound guided liver biopsy.
- Percussion guided liver biopsy.
● Rare
- Trans jugular liver biopsy.
- Tran's femoral liver biopsy.
- Laparoscopic liver biopsy
Site of liver biopsy: the biopsy site is in the seventh or eighth
intercostal space in the mid axillary line.
Equipment:
*Sterile gloves *Dressing kit *Antiseptic
solution
*Local anesthetic *Biopsy needle *Needle and
syringe
*Specimen container with formalin
Procedure:

Nursing Action Rationale
Preparatory phase:
1- Ascertain the results of coagulation
tests (prothrombin time, partial
thromboplastin time, and platelet count)
are available and that a compatible donor
blood is available.
2-Check for signed consent; conﬁrm that
informed consent has been provided.
3-Measure and record the patient’s pulse,
respirations, and blood pressure
immediately before biopsy.
4-Describe to the patient in advance: steps
of the procedure; sensations expected;
after-effects anticipated; restrictions of
activity and monitoring procedures to
follow.
Performance phase:
5- Support the patient during the
procedure.
6-Expose the right side of the patient’s upper
abdomen (right hypochondria)
7-Instruct the patient to inhale and exhale
deeply several times, ﬁnally to exhale, and
Many patients with liver diseases
have clotting defects and are at risk
for bleeding
Ensure that the patient consent to
this invasive procedure Prebiopsy
values provide a basis on which to
compare the patient vital signs and
evaluate status after procedure
Explanations allay fears and
ensure cooperation.
Encouragement and support of
the nurse enhance comfort and
promote a sense of security.
The skin at the site of
penetration will be cleansed and
a local anesthetic will be
inﬁltrated.
Holding the breath immobilizes
the chest wall
and the diaphragm; penetration
of the diaphragm thereby is