Body Language and Public Speaking
A Guide to Improving Your Presentation 
Skills

Welcome to the World 
of Public Speaking!
This is a skill you will use throughout your life, and is not just something you do at 
school. It is an essential tool that will open doors to endless opportunities to you, 
both personally and professionally. 
Whether you’re preparing for a group 
presentation, joining the Debate Team 
or simply want to convince someone to 
accept a point of view you’re passionate 
about, the skills and tips you learn here 
will help you get there!
Let’s look at one of the most important 
aspects of Public Speaking you should 
master to engage and persuade your 
audience: body language.

What is Body 
Language?
Body language is the non -verbal 
communication expressed 
through physical movements 
including gestures, posture and 
facial expressions. 
It is a powerful form of 
communication as it typically 
enhances the words we speak. 
Body language often conveys 
emotions, attitudes, intentions 
and sometimes, unspoken 
thoughts.

Think-Pair-Share!
On your worksheet, complete Question 1. Once complete, discuss your 
answers as a class. 
Imagine you are observing the audience at a live comedy show. List 
THREE examples of body language you might see in an audience 
member at this time.
and
Imagine you are observing a 
person of importance giving 
a speech to the nation. List 
THREE examples of body 
language you might see in 
this person as they speak.

5 Key Elements of Body Language
When you think of body language, you might think of the phrase, 
“actions speak louder than words.” 
Let’s take a close look at five key elements of body language to 
consider the next time you are presenting to a group.
1. Posture
2. Hand Gestures
3. Eye Contact
4. Facial Expressions
5. Proximity to Audience

1. Posture
This is very important when public speaking because it tells the audience 
how confident you are as a speaker. When you appear confident, the 
words you speak are likely to be seen as more credible.
Do: Stand tall and still with your chin up.
Don’t: Fidget, rock back and forth on your feet or slouch.

Question 2
On your worksheet, complete 
Question 2. Once complete, discuss 
your answers as a class. 
In your own words, explain why 
posture is important while giving a 
speech. Provide ONE example of 
where this would apply.

2. Hand Gestures
You don’t want to be caught fidgeting or 
moving nervously while speaking, but you 
also don’t want to lose your audience’s 
interest by standing completely still.
Use hand gestures to emphasise points, 
maintain your audience’s interest and 
reinforce your own confidence as a 
speaker. 
Do: Use your fingers to count out key 
points, point where necessary and open 
your palms upwards to the audience.
Don’t: Tap nervously on the 
podium/table, scratch your body, touch 
your face or put your hands on your hips.

Question 3
On your worksheet, complete 
Question 3. Once complete, 
discuss your answers as a 
class. 
In your own words, 
explain how hand 
gestures can improve 
your presentation. 
Provide TWO specific 
examples.

3. Eye Contact
Eye contact creates a connection  between you and the audience. It shows 
you care about what you say and how this information is being received. It 
also shows that you value your audience’s interest and input. 
Do: Hold eye contact with 
each audience member 
(where possible) for 3 -5 
seconds.
Don’t: Flick your eyes 
around the room, stare at 
the ceiling/floor or rely on 
your notes throughout 
your presentation.

Questions 4 – 5
On your worksheet, complete 
Questions 4-5. Once 
complete, discuss your 
answers as a class. 
Explain why eye contact is 
important when holding a 
conversation with one or 
two other people. 
and
In your own words, explain 
how eye contact can 
improve the way your 
audience engages in your 
presentation. Give TWO 
examples.

4. Facial Expressions
Your passion for a topic should show 
through your facial expressions, whether 
enthusiastic, saddened, angry or 
enlightened. 
Facial expressions also engage the audience 
(as a form of subtle entertainment) and can 
even build empathy between you and your 
audience. 
Do: Smile and raise your eyebrows where 
necessary and effective.
Don’t: Speak with a blank stare or 
mismatch your expressions to what you 
are saying (e.g. smile while talking about 
something upsetting, or frown while 
sharing a message of positivity).

Questions 6 – 7
On your worksheet, complete Questions 6 -7. Once complete, discuss your 
answers as a class. 
Write down TWO examples of facial expressions you might see used by 
a presenter at an actors’ awards show. Explain why they are used and 
the effect they have on the audience. 
and
Explore the possible facial 
expressions you might see 
used by a motivational 
speaker on the topic of 
overcoming hardship.

5. Proximity to Audience
Understanding the space you’ve been given allows you to:
• Control your voice projection according to the distance between 
you and your audience.
• Use your space effectively for pacing or moving closer to/further 
from the audience for effect as necessary.
• Improve your ability to engage and persuade. 
Do: Move closer to your audience 
to build trust where appropriate. 
Don’t: Stand behind a podium for 
a long time unless this is required 
of the setting / is a marker of 
respect (e.g. A Principal’s Address).

Also consider… 
Voice Projection
Being in control of your voice volume is 
important as it ensures your audience 
hears what you are saying with clarity. It 
better captivates their attention and 
shows you are confident.
Do: When presenting in a large space, 
start by asking if the people at the back 
can hear you clearly. This is a great way 
to gauge your volume from the start. 
Don’t: Shout/bellow when presenting in a 
small room to few people, or speak softly 
in a large space (even if you are given a 
microphone).

and… 
Articulate your Words and Slow your Speech
Taking the time to speak slowly and purposefully will make it easier for your 
audience to hear what you are saying, and remember the information you 
share. 
Speaking too fast can make it difficult for the audience to retain information.
Do: Practise your speech ahead of time so 
you aren’t rushing to beat the timer.
Don’t: Assume your audience isn’t 
interested in what you’re saying! Your 
audience wants their time to be used 
effectively. This means slowing your 
speech and articulating words so the 
audience can take something away from 
your presentation at the end.

Questions 8
On your worksheet, complete Question 
8. Once complete, discuss your answers 
as a class. 
Write ONE paragraph exploring the 
different ways you could approach 
presenting to a small audience (e.g. 
your class) and a large auditorium of 
people (e.g. your school). 
Be sure to talk about proximity to 
audience, voice projection and any 
other elements of public speaking 
you have learned that are relevant.

Think-Pair-Share!
On your worksheet, complete Question 9. Once complete, discuss your 
answers as a class. 
In pairs, read through the following list of public speaking situations. 
In the right -hand column, write up to four examples of body language 
(in bullet point form) the speaker should consider while presenting. 
The first one has been 
done for you.

Top 10 Colour Schemes that Make Slides 
Memorable

•Limit to 3-4 main colours to avoid visual chaos.
•Use white or negative space to let colours breathe.
•Be consistent—use the same colours for the same types of information.
•Highlight selectively—save your brightest or boldest colours for the most 
important elements.
•Test on the actual display device to make sure colours look as intended
Pro Tips for Using Colour in Presentations

Good Luck!
Keeping these tips in mind, you will certainly improve your 
chances of persuading an audience with your knowledge, 
confidence and charisma in your next presentation.

Additional Resources:
Good Presentation VS Bad Presentation
Presentation Good/Bad Examples
How to Give Better Presentations