Communication Vs. Effective Communication
Communication is simply the flow of information from the sender to the
receiver, regardless of whether the recipient understands the message.
Effective communication, on the other hand, ensures that the message
is clearly understood by the recipient, leading to the desired response o
r action. It involves attributes that enhance clarity, impact, and reception
of the message.
The difference between communication and effective communication lies in the clarity and
understanding of the message.
While communication is about transmitting information, effective communication focus
es on ensuring that the information is received and understood as intended.

Effective Communication 
 • Effective communication is a process through which the 
sender conveys a message that the receiver readily receives 
and understands. It is a two-way process instead of a one-
way process. 
• A two-way information sharing process which involves one 
party sending a message that is easily understood by the 
receiving party. 
• Effective communication is the process through which a 
message is passed to the intended recipient, and it is 
understood by him or her, thus eliciting the required 
response. It involves the use of body language, gestures, 
listening skills and emotional awareness.

Why Learn Effective 
Communication? 
• The ability to communicate effectively is 
an art that can be used in many areas of 
your life, from employment and education 
to parenting and relationships. An 
effective communicator takes into 
account the audience or listener receiving 
the message and communicates 
accordingly.

How to Communicate Effectively?
1- Effectively Communicating Your Message To effectively 
communicate a message, you must understand how a receiver will 
process your message. It is important to include visuals, auditory 
effects as well as kinesthetic information (the interpretation of body 
language such as facial expressions and gestures — or, more formally, 
non-verbal behavior related to movement, either of any part of the 
body or the body as a whole) to appeal to the widest range of listeners.
2- Knowing Your Audience If you want to know details 
about your audience, send out a survey asking specific 
questions about age, interests, type of job performed, 
whether a parent or not. This information can assist you with 
formulating the message you will be sharing.

3- Paying Attention to Nonverbal Cues Effective 
communication means also paying attention to the 
nonverbal cues of the receiver. People who are listening 
attentively will often give you eye contact or a gesture 
such as a smile or a nod of the head to let you know they 
are listening. 
4- Removing Barriers to Communication 
Remove barriers to communicating your message. 
For example, do not think about what happened 
right before you arrived to speak, whether it is a 
flat tyre or whether you received bad news. Focus 
all of your attention on the receiver and deliver the 
message in a way that he will understand.

ELEMENTS OF 
COMMUMUNICATION
For effective communication to take place, the following elements 
MUST be present:
Sender: The sender initiates communication 
Message: The message is what the sender communicates to the 
receiver 
Channel: This is the means used to transmit the message from the 
sender to the receiver. 
Receiver – the recipient of the message - 
Feedback: this is the response the sender gets from the receiver

STAGE 1:
CONCEIVING THE MESSAGE 
 • The first stage in the communication process is 
the decision made by a sender to communicate 
a message, such as a scream of fright or gasp 
of pain. Others are the result of an impulse 
which occurs so quickly that the sender is barely 
conscious of having decided to stay or do 
anything.

STAGE 2:
ENCODING THE MESSAGE
• Before the message is sent to the recipient, the sender needs to 
encode it in an appropriate language. The language may take the form 
of a gesture of or a carefully written letter or report. It may also take 
the form of a picture, symbol or non-verbal expression.
• The languages of communication include the following: - The spoken 
word (oral) - The written word - The number - The picture, drawing or 
symbol or - The non-verbal communication – expression, gesture – 
Posture
• When the sender is ready with the message, then it is ready for 
transmission (sending the message).
• Therefore, it is up to the sender to make sure that the message 
accurately reflects what is intended and is then presented in the most 
suitable format.
• Clarity of purpose, message and delivery are essential elements of 
effective communication.

STAGE 3: 
SELECTING THE 
COMMUNICAITON CHANNEL
•  A channel is a vehicle/medium by which the message is passed on 
to the audience. For you to select/choose an appropriate channel, ask 
yourself: 
• Am I going to communicate by use of words, pictures or both? 
• Which medium would be the most appreciated by the audience – 
written or spoken, a letter or personal chat? 
• Once the language has been chosen, the sender needs to select a 
medium through which to transmit the message. The choice of 
medium depends upon a number of, sometimes quite complicated 
factors. If the message is disciplinary, then a formal, private interview 
may be required. 
• Some messages must be written – contracts are an obvious example 
– and geographical distance may require that the message is 
transmitted in letter-form.
• Alternatively, the need for a quick exchange of attitudes and opinions 
may suggest a meeting as the best medium.

Once the sender has encoded and is ready to send the message, he/she has to choose 
the appropriate medium/channel to do this.
This could be the following: face-to-face – meetings, interviews, presentations, informal 
discussions etc; oral – using telephone, cell phone, voice mail, answering machines etc; 
written- using letters, memos, reports, forms, fax messages, text messages or e-mail etc; 
visual- using charts, tables, diagrams, slides, maps or notices etc. 
The likely effect of a message upon its receiver will also influence the choice of medium. 
Bad news, for example, is much better broken in a private interview than more 
impersonally in a letter

STAGE 4: 
DECODING THE 
MESSAGE.
•  Before a message can be absorbed or acted upon, it 
first needs to be understood. 
• Many messages are ineffective because the sender 
failed to realize that the language he had chosen was 
beyond the ability of his receiver to comprehend.
• Terms like ‘burn it’ and ‘jargon’ are frequently employed 
when someone has used inappropriate language.

Some of the reasons 
for failure by a 
receiver to decode a 
message successfully 
are: 
Interpreting the Message: the receiver ensures that he/she understands the underlying as 
well as the explicit meaning e.g. a received message may conceal a hidden meaning – 
meaning – message to be read ‘between the lines. The receiver must interpret the 
message correctly as intended by the sender. 
1. The receiver does not share the sender’s language 
2. The sender’s jargon (words or phrases) is unknown to the receiver. When we used 
words, we should always remember the following: 
➢ Words mean different things to different people 
➢ Words mean different things to the same person at different times 
3. The sender is a specialist and the receiver is layman 
4. Education, cultural pursuits and outlooks create a language block between sender and 
receiver. 
5. Put yourself in his or her position. Try to ascertain your receiver’s abilities and limitations. 
6. Avoid vagueness or ambiguity.
7. Check that you are receiving the desired feedback – answers, confirmations, indications 
or attitudes.

AS A RECEIVER: 
• 1. Give the incoming message all your attention. Avoid 
being side-tracked or distracted 
• 2. Check that the sender’s chosen communication 
medium is meeting your needs. Help the sender to put his 
message across effectively by letting him know if the 
medium is inappropriate. 
• 3. Ensure that you comprehend the message fully. Seek 
confirming feedback from the sender if the message is 
not clear by asking for explanations or repeats. 
• 5. Provide the sender with sufficient feedback. Reassure 
him that you have received and understood the message.

FEEDBACK
•  It is important that the receiver sends feedback to the sender. 
• This could be in the form of signals passed to the sender – eg. Written reply, spoken word 
or person to person communication. 
• By sending back the feedback, the process starts again. 
• There are quite a number of problems that may occur at different stages during the 
process, and it is important to know this. They include:  
➢ Message ill-conceived/vague/ambiguous  
➢ Message encoded in wrong language, inappropriate tone  
➢ Use of wrong medium, time wasting, expensive, no written record  
➢ Receiver unable to comprehend sender’s language, use of jargon/vocabulary unfamiliar 
to receiver  
➢ Message wrongly interpreted, poor relationship between receiver and sender 
➢ Feedback not given or interpreted wrongly

Noise
• Noise or interference (barriers) in different stages can affect the 
delivery of the message. 
• This can interfere with the encoding and decoding stages. 
• Any kind of interruption that distracts or distorts the message 
from being understood correctly or clearly is considered as noise. 
E.g. dressing, religious, affiliations, aroma or even stench.

Importance of 
Feedback
In general, we can 
quantify the following 
importance of feedback 
in communication, either 
in a formal or informal 
setting:
1. It completes the whole 
process of 
communication and 
makes it continuous. 
2. It sustains 
communication process 
3. It makes one know if 
one is really 
communication or 
making sense
4. It is a basis for 
measuring the 
effectiveness of 
communication 
5. It is a good basis for 
planning on what next to 
be done especially 
statistical report
6. Communication will 
be useless without 
feedback

SUMMARY
In summary we note that communication is a two-way process that takes place through several stages which include:
1. Conception of the message happens when an idea, thought or feeling is formulated in the mind of the sender as a result of an external or internal 
stimulus or due to motivation. At this stage, the sender decides on the nature of the message. 
2. Encoding of the message involves giving he message a communication form. This may be verbal or non-verbal. 
3. Channel – the sender selects the most appropriate and effective vehicle that will deliver the message to the receiver. The media may include 
telephone, fax, letter, mouth etc.
4. Transmission: the message is transferred to the receiver through the selected channel. At this stage, there is possibility of the message being 
interfered with by “noise” 
5. Reception: this is the physical act of receiving the message through any of the six senses – the sense of hearing, touch, taste, sight and smell. 
6. Decoding:This is done by relating the language to the knowledge of terms and vocabulary. Comprehension takes place when the receiver tries to 
spend moments to absorb the meaning and understand the technical jargon used by the sender. 
7. Interpretation is similar to what is loosely termed as ‘reading between the lines’. This means that you as the receiver should search for the 
underlying meaning. 
8. Feedback: The message is encoded and a response is given in a language that the sender can understand. The communication process is then 
complete when the message is transmitted back to the sender. The receiver goes through the same communication process as the sender had 
done. Only when this cycle is completed, can communication be said to have been effective.