AN INTRODUCTION TO 
COMMUNICATION SKILLS
UNC04

ABOUT  THE COURSE
Communication Skills
UNC04
50% FINAL EXAM
10% Online Quiz (LMS)
20% Mid-term Exam
20% Final Assignment

WHAT IS COMMUNICATION?
1. Communication is an exchange of facts, ideas, opinions or emotions by two or more persons (W.H. 
Norman & Summer) 
2. Communication is common understanding through communion of minds and hearts. 
3. The English word ‘communication’ is derived from a Latin word “communis” which means ‘common’ . 
4. Communication is the sharing of information 
5. Communication is the giving and receiving of messages
6. Communication is the transfer of information from one or more people to one or more other people.

Communication requires a sender, a message, and an 
intended recipient, although the receiver need not be 
present or aware of the sender's intent to communicate 
at the time of communication; thus communication can 
occur across vast distances in time and space. 
Communication requires that the 
communicating parties share an area of 
communicative commonality. The 
communication process is complete once the 
receiver has understood the message.

CATEGORIES OF COMMUNICATION
The different categories of 
communication are: 
• Spoken or Verbal 
Communication: face-to-
face, telephone, radio or 
television and other media. 
• Non-Verbal 
Communication: body 
language, gestures, how we 
dress or act.
• Written Communication: 
letters, e-mails, books, 
magazines, the Internet or via 
other media. 
• Visualizations: graphs and 
charts, maps, logos and other 
visualizations can 
communicate messages.

Context
• Context - Communication is affected by the context in which it takes 
place. This context may be physical, social, chronological or cultural. 
Every communication proceeds with context. The sender chooses the 
message to communicate within a context.

EFFICTIVE COMMUNICATION
• Note: The terms ‘Communication’ and ‘effective communication’ are 
distinctly different. One can communicate without effectively 
communicating the message. The main goal of communication is to 
ensure that there is effective communication.

OBJECTIVES OF 
COMMUNICATIONS
• We always have an objective when 
communicating. Effective communication will 
also enable you to: 
• Get the job you want
• Boost your chances for promotion
• Help others get things done
• Benefit your business
• Improve your grades, 
• Advance socially 
• Ensure a bright future 
• Enhance other skills 
• Helping others get ahead

CONCLUSION
• Being able to communicate effectively is the 
most important of all life skills. Communication 
is simply the act of transferring information from 
one place to another.
• This may be vocally (using voice), written (using 
printed or digital media such as books, 
magazines, websites or emails), visually (using 
logos, maps, charts or graphs) or non-verbally 
(using body language, gestures and the tone and 
pitch of voice). 
• How well this information is transmitted and 
received is a measure of whether your 
communication skills are good.