Levels of 
communication  
1. Intrapersonal (Within a person)  
2. Interpersonal (Face to face)
3. Public Communication
4. Mass communication

1- Intrapersonal Communication 
• Intrapersonal communication is also known as self-talk or thinking and
refers to the ways we communicate with ourselves.
• We use intrapersonal communication to plan our lives, rehearse scenarios
before we act them out, and tell ourselves what to do or not do.
• The way we communicate with ourselves greatly affects our self-esteem.
A person who tells himself, "I'm so stupid" when he fails an exam will
likely have poorer self-esteem than someone who thinks, "I did really well
on the previous four exams. I must have just been having an off day, and
I'll do better next time."

2- Interpersonal Communication 
• Interpersonal communication is the communication we have
with other people. This type of communication varies from
highly impersonal to extremely personal.
• The degree to which we communicate, or fail to communicate,
with others influences how our relationships with them
develop, continue or come to an end.

3- Public Communication 
• Public communication refers to public speeches that we deliver in front of
audiences. Public communication serves three main purposes: to entertain,
to persuade and/or to inform.
• It is different from other forms of interaction in that it requires greater levels
of planning and preparation on the part of the speaker and involves less
direct interaction.
• Audience members still interact with the speaker via mostly nonverbal
symbols, but there is a lesser degree of give and take than there is in one-
on-one conversations.

4- Mass Communication
• Mass communication refers to any type of media that is used to
communicate with mass audiences. Examples of mass media include books,
television, radios, films, computer technologies, magazines and newspapers.
• Although mass communication does include certain computer technologies,
it does NOT include technologies like email that are used to communicate
one-on-one with someone.
• Mass communication is responsible for giving us views of events, issues and
people from cultures that differ from ours. It enables us to learn what is
going on in distant places in the world and lets us learn the viewpoints of
people and cultures with whom we do not have direct contact

Forms/Types of Communicating
VERBAL
 WRITTEN
 NON-VERBAL

Verbal Communication 
All forms of communication can be categorized as either verbal or nonverbal. Both verbal and nonverbal communication 
can be subdivided into either vocal or non-vocal. 
Verbal communication involves using speech to exchange information with others. We usually communicate verbally in 
face-to-face conversations such as; meetings, interviews, conferences, speeches, phone calls e.t.c. Much of the 
communication that takes place between people is both verbal and non-verbal; that is, it is based on language and 
gestures. 
Verbal communication of the vocal category includes spoken language, while non-vocal verbal communication involves 
written communication as well as communication, that is transmitted through sign language, finger spelling, Braille, or 
other similar alternatives to verbal language.

Paraverbal/paralinguistic/ 
paralanguage features 
• Paralinguistic or paralanguage features are the aspects of spoken
communication that do not involve words. They add emphasis or shades of
meaning to what people say. Paralinguistic features accompany verbal
communication and are the vocal signals beyond the basic verbal message.
• Paralinguistic elements in a person's speech, convey meaning beyond the
words and grammar used. Examples of paralinguistic features include pitch,
rate, quality of voice and amplitude.
• Other forms of paralanguage can also include laughter or imitative speech.
Prosody, which is the rhythm, pattern, stress, rate, volume, inflection and
intonation of a person's speech, is also a form of paralanguage. People express
meaning not just in what they say but in the way they say it.
• The paralinguistic features employed by a speaker provide hint to the meaning,
communicate the speakers’ attitudes and convey their emotion. Paralinguistic
features also alert the listener as to how to interpret the message. Many of
these paralinguistic features are culturally coded and inherent in verbal
communication, often at a subconscious level.

Written Communication 
Written communication involves any type of interaction that makes use of the written word. 
Communication is a key to any endeavor involving more than one person. 
Communicating through writing is essential in the modern world and is becoming ever more so as 
we participate in what is now commonly called the information age. In fact, written communication 
is the most common form of business communication. 
It is essential for small business owners and managers to develop effective written communication 
skills and to encourage the same in all employees. The information age has altered the ways in 
which we communicate and placed an increasing emphasis on written versus oral communications.

Non-Verbal
• Non-verbal communication is a type of communication that employs gestures and
body language. The term "body language" is sometimes used to denote non-verbal
communications.
• "Body Language" is the communication of personal feelings, emotions, attitudes,
and thoughts through body-movements such as gestures, postures, facial
expressions, touch, smell, walking styles and positions among others.
• These movements can be done either consciously or involuntarily; more often they
“happen” subconsciously, and are accompanied, or not accompanied, by words.

Non-Verbal
• There are basically three elements in any face-to-
face communication. These three elements
account differently for the meaning of the
message:
• Words account for 7%
• Tone of voice account for 38%
• Body language accounts for 55% of the message
• Our body language and tone of voice should be
consistent with the words we use. This is only
possible when we say what we mean to say and
say it rightly. Otherwise, we can confuse people
and reduce the prospect of getting our message
across to be understood. Non-verbal
communication can lead to misunderstandings,
communication failure and even conflicts if the
interlocutors are careless.

Non-verbal communication 
includes: 
• (P)OSTURES & GESTURES  
• (E)EYE CONTACT  
• (O)RIENTATION  
• (P)RESENTATION  
• (L)OOKS  
• (E)XPRESSIONS OF EMOTION

Body Language
• Body language and kinesics are based on the
behavioral patterns of non-verbal communication.
Body language can actually contradict verbal
communications and reveal our inner feelings about
any particular person or topic either intentionally or
unintentionally.
• The way in which you fold your arms, cross your
legs, sit, stand, walk, move your head, eyes, lips
reveal what you may be thinking or feeling.
• For example, you may be sitting and conversing with
a person; suddenly, he leans forward and with both
arms clutches the chair. By doing so he nonverbally
communicates to you his desire to end the meeting.
Body language has shed new light on the dynamics
of relationships.

Hands Gestures 
• Hands and arms are used by most of us to
communicate our thoughts. People rub
arms together, keep their arms closed, and
clinch the fists. All these tell what the
person has in his mind involuntary.
• It is a way that people non-verbally
communicate positive expectations. Hands
clenched together seems to be a confident
gesture as some people who use it are
often smiling and sound happy.
• However, if the hands are clenched too
tightly, it is indicative of frustration or
hostile attitude.

Eye Gestures/facial expression 
• Facial expression, offers the most readily observable group of gestures.
We focus our eyes on the face more often than on any other part of the
body, and the expressions we see there have widely accepted meanings.

• If a prospect's eyes are downcast and face
turned away, you're being shut out, however, if
the mouth move, he is probably considering
your presentation.
• If his eyes engage yours for several seconds at a
time with a slight, one-sided smile extending at
least to nose level, he is weighing your
proposal. It is only when you see 'eye to eye'
with another person that a real basis for
communication can be established.

Other forms of 
nonverbal 
communication 
include touch, 
smell, distance. 
Personal space refers to the physical and emotional boundaries individuals set to feel comfortable and safe in their interaction
s with others. This "buffer zone" varies significantly based on personal preferences, cultural backgrounds, and social context
s.
The concept was first introduced by anthropologist Edward T. Hall, who identified four distinct zones of personal space:
1. Intimate Space (0 to 18 inches): This zone is reserved for close relationships, such as family and romantic partners. It allows
for physical touch and close emotional connections.
2. Personal Space (1.5 to 4 feet): This distance is typical for interactions with friends and acquaintances. It maintains a level of
comfort while allowing for conversation without feeling invasive.
3. Social Space (4 to 12 feet): Common in formal settings, this zone is used for business meetings and casual interactions with
strangers. It allows for communication while maintaining a respectful distance.
4. Public Space (12 feet and beyond): This zone is used in public settings, where individuals feel detached from others, such as
during speeches or in crowded areas.

• The number of people in a
communication situation affects
the use of non-verbal
communication.
• The more the persons involved,
the more complex the use and
understanding of the non-verbal
communication becomes.
• However, to decipher the non-
verbal communication it is
important to see, interpret and
understand them holistically and
in a context, while identifying
the different types of
personalities involved.

• Trump Dominates Handshakes But William Alexander Shocked Everyone
• Trump's very long handshake with Macron