BARRIERS TO 
EFFECTIVE 
COMMUNICATION
• These are the factors that cause problems for
communication – they hinder the clear interpretation and
reception of message.
• In some situations, they are known as blockers. We must
be aware of them if we are to overcome them or
communicate in such a way as to minimize their effect.
• There are many reasons why interpersonal
communications may fail. In many communications, the
message (what is said) may not be received exactly the
way the sender intended.
• It is, therefore, important that the communicator seeks
feedback to check that their message is clearly
understood.

1. LANGUAGE BARRIERS:
When communicating in the same language, the terminology
used in a message may act as a barrier if it is not fully
understood by the receiver(s).
For example, a message that includes a lot of specialist jargon
and abbreviations will not be understood by a receiver who is
not familiar. Clearly, language and linguistic ability may act as
a barrier to communication. However, even with the
terminology used, and expressions may be misinterpreted or
even considered offensive.

2. PSYCHOLOGICAL BARRIERS:
• The psychological state of the receiver will influence how the message is received.
• For example, if someone has personal worries and is stressed, they may be
preoccupied by personal concerns and not as receptive to the message as if they
were not stressed. Stress management is an important personal skill that affects our
interpersonal relationships.
• Anger is another example of a psychological barrier to communication, when we
are angry it is easy to say things that we may later regret and also to misinterpret
what others are saying.
• More generally people with low self-esteem may be less assertive and therefore
may not feel comfortable communicating - they may feel shy about saying how
they really feel or read negative sub-texts into messages they hear.

3. PHYSIOLOGICAL 
BARRIERS:
• Physiological barriers may result from
the receiver’s physical state: for example,
a receiver with reduced hearing may not
grasp to entirety of a spoken
conversation especially if there is
significant background noise.

4. PHYSICAL BARRIERS:
• An example of a physical barrier to communication is
geographic distance between the sender and receiver(s).
Communication is generally easier over shorter distances
as more communication channels are available and less
technology is required.
• Although modern technology often serves to reduce the
impact of physical barriers, the advantages and
disadvantages of each communication channel should be
understood so that an appropriate channel can be used to
overcome the physical barriers.

5. SYSTEMATIC 
BARRIERS:
• Systemic barriers to communication may exist in
organisations where there are inefficient or
inappropriate information systems and
communication channels, or where there is a lack
of understanding of the roles and responsibilities
for communication.
• In such organisations, individuals may be unclear
of their role in the communication process and
therefore not know what is expected of them.

6. ATTITUDINAL BARRIERS:
• Attitudinal barriers are behaviour or perceptions
that prevent people from communicating
effectively.
• Attitudinal barriers to communication may result
from personality conflicts, poor management,
resistance to change or a lack of motivation.
• Effective receivers of messages should attempt to
overcome their own attitudinal barriers to
facilitate effective communication.

THE FOLLOWING ARE SOME SPECIFIC BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE COMMUNICAT ION:
(a) Differences in Perception: eg people of different ages, nationalities, cultures, education, occupation, sex, status,
personality etc - each have different perceptions. Thus, differences in perception are often the root of many of other barriers
to communication. Communication does not easily take place between people who have different perceptions. Eg. An
employee listening to his manager talk about the importance of teamwork and its benefits but is not comfortable in the team
would likely ‘block’ the message.
(b) Jumping to Conclusions: “see what we expect to see, hear, what we expect to hear” rather than what is being said. 
(c) Stereotyping: treating all people as if they were the same. Thus, danger of discussing people and what they
say/communicate. A good example is taking a whole community/religious group to be the same if there is one who has
done wrong.

(d) Lack of Knowledge: It is difficult to communicate effectively with someone who has a very different 
background from yours, or whose knowledge of the particular subject of discussion is considerably less 
than yours. 
(e) Lack of interest: The receiver’s lack of interest in your message. Do not assume that everyone is as 
concerned about our interests as we are.
(f) Difficulties in Self-Expression: Communicator has difficulty finding the words to carry ideas. This also 
goes with lack of confidence. 
(g) Emotions: Any strong felt emotion of either receiver or communicator can also prove to be a serious 
barrier.

(h) Personality: Differences in people’s personality can cause problems. Often our 
resulting behavior can then affect the behaviour of the other person eg the issue of 
‘clash of personalities’ is one of the most common causes of communication failure. 
Strong influences against personalities may make one accept or reject what is being said 
with due consideration. 
(i) Poor Listening Skills: for example, a group/audience/receiver who is not used to 
sitting down and concentrating – therefore, message is not successfully communicated 
thus resulting in an inappropriate feedback.
(j) Information Overload: this results from giving too much details, facts in every short 
period of time. This would mean that most of the message would not be 
communicated successfully.

(l) Lack of Understanding: using ‘big’ words or unfamiliar words to the audience/receiver that they 
do not understand, words with symbolic meaning, different interpretations will lead to 
misunderstanding. 
(m) Poor Timing: The message must be delivered at the right time. Eg. Telephoning at lunch time 
and Friday afternoons may make it difficult to get through because the person you need is not 
available. 
(n) Noise: This is any sound/anything that is unwanted which interrupts a communication channel. 
The noise could be either: Technical: eg. Interference on a mobile phone or fax not working 
Physical: too much activity in the area where communication is taking place Psychological:
increased anxiety may interfere with ability to pay attention to the other speaker.

(o) Appearance of the Individual: this may hinder communication if 
the audience is critical. A speaker with a dirty outfit/who is poorly 
dressed may not receive the favourable response from the audience. 
(p) Distraction: any upsetting factor which influences the human 
senses such as strong light/strong smell will hinder effective 
communication. 
(q) Mistrust: when the parties in the business of communicating do 
not trust one another and there is no goodwill. Effective 
communication will be hindered.

OVERCOMING 
COMMUNICATION 
BARRIERS
Unless we overcome the 
barriers that make us not 
communicate, more 
barriers will be created.

The following are 
some of the ways of 
overcoming the 
barriers:
(i) Face-to-Face: This will allow for constant 
adjustment of the message to ensure that the message 
is received well. 
(ii) Being sensitive to the other person’/people’s 
backgrounds. Eg. Where the person grew, tribe, 
culture, language and level of education. 
(iii) The use of direct, simple and unambiguous 
language while taking care of words with symbolic 
meaning. 
(iv) The use of frequent repetition; restatement and 
reinforcement/follow-up to ensure the message is 
properly understood.

(v) Being supportive to counter any defensive attitude – continued support will help the 
communication process 
(vi) Being a good listener: this will encourage the communicator to continue giving the 
message.
(vii) Put away any mistrust, prejudice bias and misunderstanding to ensure you communicate 
and interpret the message clearly.
(ix) By developing interest in the subject of communication and preparing oneself for the same.
(x) By using modern technology methods which enables not only faster communication bust 
also over great distances and geographical barriers.

(viii) Using appropriate channels of communication that keeps the 
noise levels low 
(ix) By developing interest in the subject of communication and 
preparing oneself for the same.

CONCLUSION • The above stated are only a few of the many 
factors which can cause communication to be 
less effective or even fail completely.
• It is up to the receiver of the 
communication/sender to make conditions as 
satisfactory as possible so that communication 
– a far from perfect process stands a chance of 
being effective.