LISTENING SKILLS
"We were given two ears but only one mouth, because
listening is twice as hard as talking."
Listeners must first hear what is said. Listening skills involve
identifying and selecting relevant points recognized as having
meaning; that are understood and held in short-term
memory.
These can be related to what has gone before and to what
comes after. Any information considered important is
selected and stored for future reference in the long-term
memory

Effective LISTENING SKILLS
Decoding (understanding) a message is generally easier for the listener if a person is speaking
rather than reading something out loud. In addition the speaker's facial expressions, and the
stress placed on words help the listener to understand the message. Developing effective
listening skills involves two specific steps (Hartley &Bruckman, 2002). These are:
1. To develop the ability to recognize and deal with barriers that prevents you listening with
full attention.
2. To develop and use behaviors which help you to listen. Such behaviors can also serve to let
the other person know that you are giving them your full attention.

LISTENING SKILLS
Listening is the absorption of the
meanings of words and sentences by the
brain. Listening leads to the understanding
of facts and ideas.
To listen is to pay attention or sticking to
the task at hand despite distractions. It
requires concentration, which is the
focusing of your thoughts upon one
problem.

Active listening
• Person who incorporates listening with concentration is actively listening.
Active listening is a method of responding to another that encourages
communication. Active listening is composed of six distinct components
• Hearing: The physiological process of receiving sound and/or other stimuli.
• Attending: The conscious and unconscious process of focusing attention on
external stimuli.
• Interpreting: The process of decoding the symbols or behavior attended to.
• Evaluating: The process of deciding the value of the information to the
receiver.
• Remembering: The process of placing the proper information into short-term
or long-term storage.
• Responding: The process of giving feedback to the source and/or other
receivers.

Barriers to Listening
• The following list shows just some barriers to effective
listening:
1. sources of noise
2. Forming a judgment or evaluation before we understand
what is being said, or „jumping to conclusions‟.
3. Hearing what we want to hear.
4. Being inattentive - thinking about something else entirely.
5. Having a closed mind- you do not want to hear what the
person has to say.
6. Feeling anxious or self-conscious.
7. Judging the person, either positively or negatively.
8.Cultural issues, e.g. listening to the differences in
pronunciation of different accent, rather than the content of
the message.
It is important that such barriers to listening are recognized and
dealt with. With developing awareness, we can have more
control over those barriers that are internal to ourselves and
can adopt and use more helpful listening behaviors.

LISTENING
EFFECTIVELY
TIPS
Listening effectively is hearing and
understanding what a speaker is
saying and how it applies to you and
then remembering it for future use
and evaluation. There are ways to
improve your listening skills for
lectures. The following is a list of
some basic techniques:
1. Recognize how ideas are organized. Lectures usually begin with some type of introduction, followed by a 
thesis statement which is supported by additional information. Most professors bring closure to their lecture 
by summarizing what they have covered. Learn to identify the lecture style that is used by your professor. 
2. Become involved in what is being said. Be an avid listener . Constantly analyze what is being said.
3. Cut through (or screen out) distractions. • background noise • unusual accents, dialects, and language 
mistakes • speaker disorganization, emotion, or habits • unrelated material • your own inner voice 
4. Organize statements into main points and supporting reasons. Using an outline form may be helpful.
5. Discriminate between relevancies and irrelevancies. Remember that not all information is important. 
6. Maintain an active body state. Keeping alert and having eye-contact with the speaker will help you listen 
more effectively. 
In order to improve your listening skills, you will need to practice using the suggested techniques until they 
become automatic

Study Skills
• To succeed in your studies at the college you must study. 
Studying is revising the notes you took during lectures and 
reading textbooks with the aim of understanding better what 
you are reading. For better understanding, it is important that 
you as a student come up with a study plan that works best 
for you. 
• We are going to discuss some of the study plans and study 
tips that will help you to study better and gain good grades at 
the end of your undergraduate studies.

Study tips: Prepare a study timetable
• 1. Draw up a study timetable and block in all activities, work, 
lectures, and any other responsibilities you may have. Include 
mealtimes and travel time. 
• Be realistic. This should be an actual timetable, which is possible, 
not some ideal that can never be achieved. Make enough copies to 
cover all the weeks leading up to exams or assessment.
• 2. Work out your most effective study times. When do you study 
best? Morning, afternoon, or evening? Early bird or night owl?
• 3. Consider: Which subjects need the most study and revision? 
Estimate how many hours you think you need for each subject and 
try to match this with the hours available in your weekly planner.
• 4. Block in some study times, preferably 2-4 hours at a time, with 5-
10 minutes‟ break every 40-50 minutes.

Study tips: Prepare a study timetable
• 5. Start at exam periods or due dates for assignments and work backwards, blocking in more study time in 
the relevant subject closer to the exam/due date. Make sure that you prepare for each exam over several days 
and don't fill up the last few days too heavily. Also put in any events which may affect your study times, such 
as birthdays, social events and work functions.
• 6. You may want to plan in detail for each study session. Write down which lecture/topic/text you will be 
researching/ reviewing. This way, you can ensure that you will cover all the required information in the times 
you have allocated. Consider: What do I want to achieve in this session? (eg: summary/ notes / list of 
definitions/ language exercise/ essay plan/ list of resources/ timeline). Where will I need to study? Do I need 
access to a computer/ the internet/ the library? 
• 7. If you have some smaller amounts of time available for study , consider how they could be used: skim 
reading an article, proofing a draft, sorting a bibliography, organizing reference cards, etc. Travel time on public 
transport can also be used for reading.

Start using your study timetable. 
• See how well it works. What did you leave out? It can be 
changed as you go, but do this consciously: look at what is 
not working, which areas you need more time in and change 
the timetable. 
• This is much better than just throwing the timetable away. 
Then you can be sure that you will still cover all the material 
you need to.

Establish your Prime Study Time
• Your prime study time(PST) is that time when your concentration is at its 
highest. Everyone has a PST and they all know it. That is why some 
people wake up early in the morning to study(Such people their PST is 
early morning) while some stay up late to study. Study the subject you 
are having trouble with during your PST.
• Find a suitable room with comfortable furniture and good lighting.
• Set a regular time to study
• Remove distractions
• Avoid clutter (Clutter is anything that will distract you from reading what 
you had scheduled to read. Clutter includes books from other subjects, 
e.g. if you are studying Literature, then mathematics, Biology and other 
subject books are clutter because they can distract you from reading. 
Newspapers and story books are also clutter.)

• Record assignments in an assignment book or a Calander
• Take notes in class and review them regularly
• Study for tests
• Make ONE minute act as TWO minutes:
Anytime you have to wait for something read your short notes. 
You will be able to kill two birds with one stone. 
You will be able to do two things at the same time: wait as you 
read for example, When in the bus going to school, read your 
short notes. When you are in the restaurant waiting to be served, 
read your short notes.

TYPES OF 
STUDY 
PLANS
• It is important to note that there are 
other study plans that a student can 
use, but we are choosing to focus on 
these because we feel that they are the 
most applicable to our students. They 
can all be used simultaneously by one 
student.

1. Preview
Preview is reading about the topic you are going to be lectured on 
before the lecture. You are often given a course outline beforehand so 
that it can help you in previewing. Preview gives you an upper hand 
because you will be able to follow and understand what the lecturer is 
talking about. It enhances your chances of retaining what is taught. 
Remember knowledge starts from known to unknown. You can also 
preview notes from the previous lecture so that you can understand the 
link between the previous lecture and the current lecture.

2. Studying with Breaks 
Studying with Breaks also called spaced study 
is a very good technique for studying. It involves 
studying for a period then taking a short break 
followed by another study session. 
For example, you can study for 2 hours then 
take a 10minute break followed by another 1 
hour of study. Spaced study is good because if 
used well the student will be able to lock what 
they are studying in their long-term memory 
(LTM) during the breaks.
The breaks act as a reward. Humans thrive 
when they are rewarded. Y our mind will also 
appreciate the reward. During the breaks reflect 
on what you have studied. Do not use the 
breaks negatively.

3- Group Study
Studying with a group of your friends can be both a fun and rewarding study method. For effective studying, it is 
important that you choose your group members wisely and follow a few rules. Study groups should:
Not be the sole 
method of study and 
they are not for 
everyone
1
Be a form of 'active 
learning' - the 
strongest kind of 
learning
2
Not let one member 
of the group 
dominate
3
Meet no more than 2-
3 times a week
4
Establish 
responsibilities for 
each group member
5
Design rules dealing 
with respect for each 
member
6
Provide contact 
information for group 
members
7

Importance of 
study groups
Help you and your group members:
See the material from a different perspective
Stay motivated and commit more time to study
Share/compare notes and study tips
Engage in discussions and debates on selected topics
Pick up new tips and material from your peers
Quiz each other on factual material