Questions about cardiovascular dysfunction , blood disorders, pneumonia, TB, 
and fluid& electrolytes  
1- Which of the following consider diagnosis for rheumatic fever? 
a) Carditis and arthritis  
b) Fever and joint pain 
c)  Arthritis and joint pain 
d) Chorea and abnormal ECG 
2- Which of the following is not symptom of valve dysfunction?  
 
a) Weight loss 
b) Chest pain  
c) Palpitations 
d) Shortness of breath   
 
3- Which of the following is surgical treatment of valve dysfunction? 
 
a) Valve repair 
b) Diuretics 
c) Beta-blockers  
d) Anticoagulants 
 
4- It is a chronic condition characterized by the buildup of fatty deposits inside the walls of arteries, 
leading to thickening, hardening, and loss of elasticity of the arterial walls. 
a) Valvular stenosis 
b) Valvular regurgitation 
c) Arteriosclerosis 
d) Atherosclerosis 
5- Which type of anemia caused due to Stem cell disorder? 
a) Iron deficiency anemia 
b) Pernicious anemia 
c) Aplastic anemia 
d) Sickle cell anemia 
6- Which type of anemia caused due to vit B12 deficiency? 
a) Iron deficiency anemia 
b) Pernicious anemia 
c) Aplastic anemia 
d) Sickle cell anemia 
   7- Which of the following is most important nursing intervention for pernicious anemia? 
a) Ensure that the patient is protected from burns and trauma  
b) Monitor for anorexia, nausea ,vomiting , and abdominal pain 
c) Avoid massaging of injection site 
d) Avoid taking iron with an antacid as it interferes with iron absorption

8- Which of the following consider surgical management for aplastic anemia?  
a) Erythropoietin  
b) Neupogen 
c) Immunosuppressive therapy  
d) Bone marrow transplantation 
9- When more, sudden and severe sickling occurs and the blood does not flow easily, it called:  
a) Irregular heart beats 
b) Paresthesia 
c) Sickle cell crisis 
d) Leukemia  
10- Which symptom is most characteristics of pneumonia? 
a) Chest pain and productive cough 
b) Rash and itching 
c) Swelling of the leg 
d) Abdominal pain 
11- Which of the following is most at risk for pneumonia? 
a) Healthy young adult 
b) Elderly people 
c) Athletes 
d) Teenagers  
12- What is the most common diagnostic procedure for pneumonia? 
a) MRI scan 
b) Chest x ray 
c) Ultrasound 
d) ECG 
13- Which of the following is possible complication of pneumonia?  
a) Pleural effusion 
b) Liver failure 
c) Kidney stones 
d) Diabetes  
14- Which type of pneumonia is acquired during hospital stay? 
a) Community acquired pneumonia 
b) Hospital acquired pneumonia 
c) Aspiration pneumonia 
d) Viral pneumonia

15- What is the causative agent of tuberculosis?  
a) Streptococcus pneumonia 
b) Myocabacterium tuberculosis 
c) Staphylococcus aureus 
d) Corynbacterium diphtheriae 
16- Which of the following not consider complications of TB? 
a) Pleurisy, pericarditis, peritonitis. 
b) Meningitis. 
c) Bone and joint infections 
d) Hypertension 
17- Which of the following IV fluids is isotonic? 
a) Normal saline 0.9% 
b) Dextrose 
c) Normal saline 0.45% 
d) Normal saline 0.3% 
18- Which of the following is intra cellular electrolytes ? 
a) Calcium (Ca++) 
b) Sodium (Na+) 
c) Potassium (K+) 
d) Chloride (Cl ) 
 
19- Which of the following means increase the sodium level? 
a) Hyperkalemia 
b) Hypercalcemia 
c) Hypermagnesemia 
d) Hypernateremia   
 
20- Which of the following occurs when the serum magnesium level falls? 
a) Hypokalemia 
b) Hypocalcemia 
c) Hypomagnesemia 
d) Hyponateremia   
21- What is the main symptom of hypocalcemia? 
a) Bone pain 
b) Muscle twitching and tetany 
c) Constipation 
d) Dry mouth  
22- Hyperparathyroidism can cause: 
a) Hypokalemia 
b) Hypercalcemia 
c) Hypomagnesemia 
d) Hypermagnesemia

23- Which electrolyte is closely associated with the function of heart muscle? 
a) Sodium 
b) Potassium 
c) Chloride 
d) Magnesium 
24- The process in which the substance moves from an area of higher concentration to an area of 
lower concentration. 
a) Diffusion 
b) Filtration 
c) Osmosis 
d) Hydrostatic pressure 
25- State or condition where the fluid output exceeds the fluid intake. 
a) Fluid volume excess  
b) Hypervolemia  
c) Hypovolemia  
d) Overhydration 
26- Which of the following nursing teaching is important for patient with hypervolemia? 
a) Instruct the client to consume a low-sodium diet 
b) Instruct the client to consume a high sodium diet 
c) Instruct the client to consume a low-calcium diet 
d) Instruct the client to consume a high- calcium diet 
 
27- Which electrolyte imbalance is associated with chvostek,s and trousseau,s signs? 
a) Hypokalemia 
b) Hypocalcemia 
c) Hypernatremia  
d) Hypermagnesemia 
28- Which electrolyte imbalance occur due to overuse of diuretics? 
a) Hyperkalemia 
b) Hypokalemia 
c) Hypernatremia  
d) Hypercalcemia 
29- Which condition occur due to excessive water intake ? 
a) Hyperkalemia 
b) Hypokalemia 
c) Hypernatremia  
d) Hyponatremia 
  
30- Which clinical sign is most commonly seen in patient with fluid overload? 
a) Dry mucous membrane 
b) Decreased skin turgor 
c) Edema and crackles in lung 
d) Low blood pressure

31- Discuss the causes of Hypovolemia. 
 Abnormal gastrointestinal losses (vomiting, nasogastric suctioning, diarrhea). 
 Abnormal skin losses: diaphoresis. 
 Abnormal renal losses: diuretic therapy, diabetes insipidus, renal disease, adrenal insufficiency, osmotic 
diuresis) 
 Peritonitis, intestinal obstruction, ascites, and burns. 
 Hemorrhage, altered intake, such as nothing by mouth (NPO). 
 
 32- List nursing interventions of dehydration. 
1. Monitor vital signs; check for orthostatic hypotension. 
2. Assess skin and mucous membranes for dryness. 
3. Assess capillary refill appropriately. 
4. Encourage oral fluid intake. 
5. Administer intravenous hydration if needed. 
6. Educate patient and family on possible causes of dehydration. 
7. Administer electrolyte replacements as needed/as ordered. 
8. Monitor intake and output. 
9. Increase frequency of mouth care. 
10. Weigh patient daily. 
33- Discuss nursing role of patient with TB. 
Isolate patient in properly ventilated room, monitor respiration for rate, effort, use of accessory muscles, and 
skin color changes, increase fluid intake to help liquefy any secretions. Record fluid intake and output, perform 
chest physiotherapy to patient several times per day, encourage coughing and deep breathing exercises, practice 
frequent hand washing cover mouth and nose with fresh tissues when coughing and sneezing, wear a mask 
when in contact with other people. 
34- List 4 nursing interventions for patient with rheumatic fever. 
1. Monitor for difficulty breathing (dyspnea) ,hacking, nonproductive cough, as these are signs of heart 
failure 
2. Determine if patient is allergic to penicillin. 
3. Monitor signs and symptoms of infection because rheumatic fever may recur 
4. Explain to patient the use of anticoagulant  
35- Give the rational of: giving folic acid supplements in pernicious anemia.  
- To produce new RBCs and to cover vitamin B12 deficiency 
36- List 4 risk factors for valve dysfunction. 
1. Age > 65 years 
2. History of rheumatic fever 
3. Infective endocarditis 
4. High blood pressure

. 
37- List 3 nursing intervention to prevent valve dysfunction. 
1. Treat strep throat  
2. Maintain good dental hygiene 
3. Maintain healthy lifestyle as exercises, balanced diet, avoid smoking and alcohol 
38- List 4 major criteria from Jones criteria for diagnosis of rheumatic fever 
1. Carditis 
2. Arthritis 
3. Chorea 
4. Subcutaneous nodules 
39 - List 3 minor criteria from Jones criteria for diagnosis of rheumatic fever 
1. Fever 
2. Joint pain 
3. Abnormalities of ECG  
40- List 5 nursing intervention to prevent Atherosclerosis 
1. Maintain healthy diet 
2. Provide regular exercise  
3. Quit smoking  
4. Maintain healthy weight 
5. Control blood pressure and regular monitoring for blood glucose level . 
41- List the general symptoms of valvular disfunction. 
1. Shortness of breath 
2. Fatigue and weakness 
3. Palpitations 
4. Chest pain or discomfort 
5. Dizziness or syncope (fainting) 
6. Swelling in ankles or abdomen (edema) 
7. Rapid weight gain due to fluid retention 
42- List 3 nursing diagnosis for atherosclerosis 
1. Ineffective Tissue Perfusion related to arterial occlusion due to atherosclerosis. 
2. Activity Intolerance related to decreased o2 supply to tissues. 
3. Imbalanced nutrition related to unhealthy eating habits.

43- List common risk factors for pneumonia 
1. Immunosuppressed patients 
2. Smoking 
3. Prolonged immobility 
4. Depressed cough reflex 
5. Nothing-by-mouth 
6. Alcohol intoxication 
7. General anesthetic, sedative 
8. Advanced age 
44- List 4 manifestations of iron deficiency anemia. 
• Fatigue 
• Palpitation 
• weakness 
• Headache 
• Brittle hair 
• Spoon like nail 
• Poor focus 
45- List 4 side effects of oral iron supplements. 
• Anorexia 
• Nausea, vomiting 
• Abdominal pain,  
• Diarrhea or constipation,  
• Melena  
• Black stool 
46- List 4 complications of thrombocytopenia. 
• Severe bleeding (internal and external) 
• Intracranial hemorrhage 
• Gastrointestinal bleeding 
• Anemia due to blood loss 
• Fatal hemorrhage if untreated