Bacterial 
meningitis
Prepared by /
Dr:  Ghada Elsayed

Outlines 
• Definition of the meningitis 
• Pathophysiology of the meningitis
• Risk factors of the meningitis
• Clinical Presentation of the meningitis
• Complications of the meningitis 
• Diagnostic Tests of the meningitis
• Management of the meningitis

Pre test
Mention causes of 
bacterial meningitis
Mention 
diagnostics test for 
bacterial meningitis

Definition 
Bacterial meningitis is an inflammation 
that involves the arachnoid and pia 
mater of the brain, the subarachnoid 
space, and the CSF .
Meningitis is a life-threatening disorder 
that is most often caused by bacteria 
or viruses.

Causes of bacterial meningitis 
Meningitis can be caused by infectious and non-infectious 
processes (autoimmune disorders, cancer/paraneoplastic 
syndromes, drug reactions).
The infectious etiologic agents of meningitis include bacteria, 
viruses, fungi, and less commonly parasites.

Risk Factors
• Risk factors for meningitis include:
• Chronic medical disorders (renal failure, diabetes, 
adrenal insufficiency, cystic fibrosis)
• Extremes of age
• Under vaccination
• Immunosuppressed states (iatrogenic, transplant 
recipients, congenital immunodeficiencies, AIDS)
• Living in crowded conditions
• Alcohol use disorder
• Presence of ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt
• Presence of external ventricular drain
• Penetrating head injury
• Lumbar puncture
• Cranial or spinal surgeries involving the opening of the 
dura
• Bacterial endocarditis

Pathophysiology 
■ Bacteria enter the CNS through the 
bloodstream and cross the blood-brain 
barrier or directly enter the bloodstream via 
penetrating trauma, invasive procedures, 
cancer, certain drugs, or ruptured cerebral 
abscess. 
An upper respiratory infection → bacteria in 
nasopharynx → bloodstream → CSF 
subarachnoid space and pia arachnoid 
membrane → meninges.

Purulent exudate → clings to meningeal layers → 
clogs CSF → tissue and vascular congestion and 
obstruction → cranial nerve dysfunction, 
hyperemia of meningeal blood vessels, brain 
tissue edema, ↑ CSF , ↑ ICP , ↑ WBC in 
subarachnoid space → acute hydrocephalus and 
seizures. 
Abnormal stimulation of hypothalamic area → 
inappropriate ADH production → water retention.

Clinical 
Presentation
■ Symptoms of upper respiratory infection possibly preceding 
meningeal irritation →
severe and unrelenting headache,
nausea,
vomiting,
fever and chills, nuchal rigidity (stiff neck), 
irritability, malaise, restlessness, 
myalgia, and tachycardia
Photophobia and signs of ↑ ICP

■ Problems with memory; ↓ LOC; disorientation to 
person, place, and year;
sleepiness, 
confusion, 
irritability,
abnormal eye movements → coma, delirium, and 
seizures 
■ Kernig’s sign: inability to extend the leg at the knee 
when the thigh is flexed 
■ Brudzinski’s sign: flexion of the hip and knee when the 
patient’s neck is flexed

Complications
■ Septic emboli and septic shock with vascular dysfunction, or DIC
■ Pericardial effusion 
■ Fluid and electrolyte imbalances 
■ Seizures and hemiparesis
■ Cranial nerve (CN) dysfunction: CN III, IV , VI, VII, VIII 
■ Cerebral infarction, brain parenchymal damage
■ Hydrocephalus and cerebral edema 
■ ↑ ICP → herniation of the brain

Diagnostic Tests 
■ Lumbar puncture, culture, and assessment of CSF and pressure → ↑ CSF pressure (CSF pressure >180 mm Hg is indicative of 
bacterial meningitis);
CSF fluid cloudy with ↑ protein, ↓ glucose, ↑ WBCs and neutrophils 
■ CBC, especially ↑ WBC 
■ Blood cultures and cultures from nasopharynx, respiratory secretions, urine 
■ Serum electrolytes, especially Na (dilutional hyponatremia), BUN, glucose
■ CXR to determine concomitant pneumonia
■ CT scan or MRI if ↑ ICP , or brain abscess or hydrocephalus

Medical 
Management
Antibiotics and supportive care are critical in all cases of 
bacterial meningitis.
Managing the airway, maintaining oxygenation,
Giving sufficient intravenous fluids while providing fever control 
are parts of the foundation of meningitis management.
The type of antibiotic is based on the presumed organism causing 
the infection.
The clinician must take into account patient demographics and 
past medical history in order to provide the best antimicrobial 
coverage.

Current 
Empiric 
Therapy
Adults (18 to 49 years old)
Ceftriaxone IV and
Vancomycin IV
Adults older than 50 years old and the 
immunocompromised
Ceftriaxone IV and
Vancomycin IV and
Ampicillin IV

Steroid 
Therapy
There is insufficient evidence to 
support the widespread use of steroids 
in bacterial meningitis.
Some studies report a reduction in 
mortality for Streptococcus 
pneumoniae meningitis, but not 
in Haemophilus influenza or Neisseria 
meningitides meningitis.

Increased 
Intracranial 
Pressure
If the patient develops clinical signs of increased intracranial 
pressure (altered mental status, neurologic deficits, non-reactive 
pupils, bradycardia), interventions to maintain cerebral perfusion 
include:
Elevating the head of the bed to 30 degrees
Inducing mild hyperventilation in the intubated patient
Osmotic diuretics such as 25% mannitol or 3% saline

Nursing 
Management 
Monitoring and recording vital signs.
Assess the Glasgow Coma Scale and pay special attention to the 
motor response, immediately inform the on-duty doctor if it falls.
Assess the patient's mental status and provide psychological 
support if the patient is conscious.
Elevate the head of the bed to 30 degrees with a straight neck for 
venous drainage from the brain.
Ensure the patient has an IV line for fluids and medications.
Administer antibiotics as prescribed

Nursing 
Management 
■ Maintain respiratory isolation until pathogen is not cultured 
in nasopharynx (usually 24 hr after antibiotic treatment). 
■ Monitor neurological status, cranial nerve function, and vital 
signs every 1–2 hr. 
Check pupils, LOC, and motor activity. 
■ Assess vascular function for signs of septic emboli.
■ Ensure ↓ environmental stimuli, quiet environment, and ↓ 
exposure to lights.
■ Administer corticosteroids to decrease inflammation: 
dexamethasone.
■ Administer anticonvulsants for seizures: phenytoin, 
phenobarbital, lorazepam.

-Administer antipyretics for fever. 
-Administer analgesia for headache.
-Administer hyperosmolar agents for cerebral edema: mannitol and 
diuretics: Lasix. 
-Insert surgical shunt if hydrocephalus is present and adjust antibiotic 
therapy per the causative agent and antibiotic sensitivity.
-Consider the following antibiotic therapy: 
-Cefotaxime (Claforan) ■ Ceftazidime (Ceptaz, Fortaz)
-Ceftriaxone (Rocephin) 
-Vancomycin 
-Meropenem (Merrem) Assess CSF analysis, Gram stain, and cultures 
for antibiotic sensitivity. Seizure Disorder

-Assess hearing power in both ears.
-Check labs (meningitis may cause SIADH)
-Check renal and liver function tests.
-Check cerebrospinal fluid lab results.
-Change position every 2-hourly to prevent bedsore if the patient 
is bedridden and apply air mattress and thromboembolic 
deterrent stockings as needed)
-Provide limb physio and chest physio to prevent the 
complications associated with immobility.

Never forget to measure random blood sugarbefore 
lumbar puncture while sending CSF for a glucose test.
A proper diet chart to provide adequate calories 
required for the body.
Put a nasogastric tube and start feeding for the 
unconscious patients, as instructed
Monitor intake and output.
Provide comfort measures

Nursing 
Diagnosis
Ineffective tissue perfusion related to cerebral edema as 
evidenced by hypercapnia.
Hyperthermia related to infection as evidenced by body 
temperature above the normal range.
Acute pain related to increased intracranial pressure as 
evidenced by headache.
Disturbed sensory perception related to decreased loss of 
consciousness as evidenced by altered sensorium.
Anxiety-related to change in the health status of a patient as 
evidenced by expressed concern and worry about actual 
hospitalization and seriousness of the illness.

Deficient knowledge related to lack of exposure to 
information as evidenced by request for information about 
medications, signs and symptoms, and behaviors to report.
The risk for injury related to the internal factors of altered 
neurologic regulatory function.
Impaired physical mobility related to intravenous infusion, 
nuchal rigidity, and restraining devices.
Interrupted family processes related to the critical nature of 
the situation and uncertain prognosis.
Ineffective airway clearance related to neuromuscular 
damage as evidenced by difficulty in breathing.

POST TEST 
Mention causes 
of bacterial 
meningitis
Mention 
complication of 
bacterial 
meningitis