Craniotomy
Prepared by / 
Dr / Ghada Elsayed

Outlines
Definition 
Indications of Craniotomy
Preoperative Care 
Postoperative Management of Craniotomy 
Nursing strategies to prevent 
postoperative complications 
▪ Nursing diagnosis for patients post 
craniotomy

Pre test 
Mention 
indication of 
craniotomy 
Mention 
complication 
post crainiotomy

Definition
• Is a surgical procedure where a neurosurgeon temporarily 
removes a piece of the skull (bone flap) to access the brain, 
treating conditions such as tumors, blood clots, aneurysms, or 
brain swelling
• Craniotomy is performed to remove a space-occupying 
abnormality such as a tumor, cyst, or vascular malformation.

Indications of 
Craniotomy
Common procedures include:
tumor resection or removal,
cerebral decompression,
evacuation of hematoma or abscess,
clipping or removal of an aneurysm 
or Arteriovenous Malformation (AVM).

Preoperative 
Care: 
Protection of the integrity of the CNS is a major 
priority of care for the patient awaiting craniotomy; 
Optimal arterial oxygenation,
hemodynamic stability,
and cerebral perfusion are essential for 
maintaining adequate cerebral oxygenation.
Management of seizure activity is essential for 
controlling metabolic needs.

Evaluation of endocrine function is necessary to prevent 
major intra-operative and postoperative complications.
Use of routine preoperative studies may include a 
Complete Blood Count (CBC); 
tests for Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, 
and Fasting Blood Glucose (FBG).
a chest radiograph; and an electrocardiogram.
Blood type and cross match may also be ordered.

•
 Preoperative teaching is necessary to prepare 
the patient and family for what to expect in the 
postoperative period.
• A description of the intravascular lines and intracranial 
catheters used during the postoperative period.
•
 Some or all of the patient's hair is shaved off in the 
operating room, and a large craniotomy dressing is applied. 
• Most patients experience some degree of postoperative eye 
or facial swelling and periorbital ecchymosis.
• An explanation of these temporary changes in appearance 
helps alleviate the shock and fear many patients and 
families experience in the immediate postoperative period.

All patients undergoing craniotomy 
require instruction to avoid activities 
known to provoke sudden changes in ICP . 
These activities include bending, lifting, 
straining, and the Valsalva maneuver.
Teaching the patient to continue to 
breathe deeply through the mouth during 
all position changes is an effective 
measure to prevent increase ICP .

The patient undergoing surgery requires preparation for the 
sensations associated with nasal packing. 
The patient often awakens with alarm because of the inability to 
breathe through the nose.
Preoperative instruction in mouth breathing and avoidance of 
coughing, sneezing, and blowing of the nose facilitates 
postoperative cooperation.
The psychosocial issues associated with neurosurgery cannot be 
over emphasized.
For some patients may be fear from permanent neurological 
impairment or fear of death. 
The patient and family must be given the opportunity to express 
their fears and concerns jointly.

Postoperative Management of Craniotomy Management 
directed toward the prevention of complications 
including the following: 
Intracranial Hypertension
Postoperative cerebral edema is expected to peak 48 to 72 
hours after surgery. 
If the bone flap is not replaced at the time of surgery, intracranial 
hypertension produces bulging at the surgical site. 
Close monitoring of the surgical site is important so that integrity 
of the incision can be maintained. 
Post craniotomy management of intracranial hypertension is 
usually accomplished through CSF drainage, patient positioning, 
hyperventilation and steroid administration.

Surgical Hemorrhage Surgical hemorrhage after a transcranial 
procedure is manifested by signs and symptoms of increasing ICP .
Hemorrhage post craniotomy may be evident from external 
drainage, the patient's complaint of persistent postnasal drip, or 
excessive swallowing.
Loss of vision after pituitary surgery indicates an evolving 
hemorrhage. Postoperative hemorrhage requires surgical re-
exploration. 
Fluid Imbalance
Fluid imbalance in the post craniotomy patient usually results 
from a disturbance in production or secretion of Antidiuretic 
Hormone (ADH).
ADH is secreted by the posterior pituitary gland.

Intra-operative manipulation of the pituitary gland or 
hypothalamus or postoperative edema can result in 
insufficient ADH.
This condition is known as Diabetes Insipidus (DI). 
The polyuria associated with DI is often more than 200 
mL/hour. Urine specific gravity of 1.005 or less and elevated 
serum osmolality provide evidence of insufficient ADH
DI is usually self-limiting, and fluid replacement is the 
only required therapy.
It may be necessary to administer vasopressin 
intravenously to control the loss of fluid.

Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak
Leakage of Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) results from an opening in the 
subarachnoid space, as evident by clear fluid draining from the surgical site.
To differentiate CSF drainage from postoperative serous drainage, a specimen 
is tested for glucose content. 
A CSF leak is confirmed by glucose values of 30 mg/dL or greater. 
Management of the patient with a CSF leak includes bed rest and head 
elevation. 
Lumbar puncture or placement of a lumbar subarachnoid catheter may be 
used to reduce CSF pressure until the dura heals.
The risk of meningitis associated with CSF leak often necessitates surgical 
repair to reseal the opening.

Deep Vein Thrombosis 
Risk factors significantly associated with neurosurgery, including 
preoperative leg weakness, longer preoperative ICU stay, longer 
recovery room time, longer postoperative ICU stay, more days of bed 
rest, and delay of postoperative mobility and activity.
Clinical manifestations of DVT include leg or calf pain, edema, 
localized tenderness, and pain with dorsiflexion or plantar flexion 
(Homans' Sign). 
The primary treatment for DVT is prophylaxis by intermittent 
pneumatic compression boots or stockings are effective in reducing 
the incidence of DVT. 
Low-dose unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin 
may also be used prophylactically in high risk patients.

Postoperative Nursing ManagementPreserving 
Adequate Cerebral Perfusion Nursing interventions 
to preserve cerebral perfusion include:
patient positioning, fluid management, and avoidance 
of postoperative vomiting and fever. 
Positioning: The head of the bed should be elevated 30 
to 45 degrees at all times to reduce the incidence of 
hemorrhage, facilitate venous drainage, and control ICP .
Other positioning measures to control ICP include 
maintaining the patient's head in a neutral position at 
all times and avoiding neck and hip flexion .

Most craniotomy patients can be turned from side to side within these 
restrictions, using pillows for support, except in some cases of 
extensive tumor removal, cranioplasty, and when the bone flap is not 
replaced. 
Fluid Management: 
Hourly monitoring of fluid intake and output facilitates early 
identification of fluid imbalance. 
Urine specific gravity must be measured if DI is suspected. 
Fluid restriction may be ordered as a routine measure to lessen the 
severity of cerebral edema or as treatment for the fluid and electrolyte 
imbalances associated with SIADH.

Vomiting and Fever:
Postoperative vomiting must be avoided to prevent increase 
in ICP and possibly surgical hemorrhage. 
Antiemetics are administered as soon as nausea is apparent.
Early resumption of nutrition in the neurosurgical patient is 
beneficial.
If the patient is unable to eat, enteral feeding delivered through 
a feeding tube is the preferred method of nutritional support 
and can be initiated as early as 24 hours after surgery.

Postoperative fever: 
Fever may adversely affect ICP and 
increase the metabolic needs of the brain.
Acetaminophen is administered orally, 
rectally, or through a feeding tube. 
External cooling measures, such as a 
hypothermia blanket, may be necessary.

Promoting Arterial Oxygenation Routine pulmonary 
care is used to maintain airway clearance and 
prevent pulmonary complications.
To prevent dangerous elevations in ICP , this care 
must be performed with the use of proper technique 
and at time intervals that are adequately spaced 
from other patient care activities. 
If pulmonary complications do arise, consideration 
must be given to maintaining adequate oxygenation 
during repositioning.

Providing Comfort and Emotional Support Pain 
management:
in the post-craniotomy patient primarily involves control of headache.
Small doses of intravenous morphine are used in the critical care 
setting. 
As soon as oral analgesics can be tolerated, acetaminophen with 
codeine is used.
Both analgesics cause constipation. 
Administration of stool softeners and initiation of a bowel program are 
important components of post-craniotomy care.
Constipation is hazardous, because straining to have a bowel 
movement can create significant elevations in blood pressure and ICP .

Maintaining Surveillance for Complications:
The postoperative neurosurgical patient is at risk for infection, 
corneal abrasions, and injury from falls or seizures.
Infection: Care of the incision and surgical dressings change as 
a physician's order.
Often, a drain is left in place to facilitate decompression of the 
surgical site.
All drainage devices must be secured to the dressing to 
prevent displacement with patient movement.
Sterile technique is required to prevent infection and resultant 
meningitis.

• Corneal Abrasions:
• Routine eye care may be necessary to prevent 
corneal drying and ulceration. 
• Periorbital edema interferes with normal blinking 
and eyelid closure, which are essential to adequate 
corneal lubrication.
• Saline drops are instilled every 2 hours.
• If the patient remains in a coma state, covering the 
eyes with a polyethylene film extending over the 
orbits and eyebrows may be beneficial.

• Injury:
• The post-craniotomy patient may experience periods of altered mentation. 
• Protection from injury may require the use of restraint devices. The side rails of the 
bed must be padded to protect the patient from injury.
• Having a family member stay at the bedside or use of music therapy is often helpful 
to keep the patient calm during periods of restlessness. 
• In rare circumstances, neuromuscular blockade and sedation may be necessary to 
control patient activity and metabolic needs on a short term basis.

• Initiating Early Rehabilitation 
• Increased activity, including ambulation, is begun as soon in the postoperative period 
as tolerated by the patient.
• Transfer to a general care or rehabilitation unit is usually accomplished as soon as 
the patient is considered to be stable and free of complications. 
• Educating Patient and Family As the patient moves toward discharge, teaching 
focuses on medication instructions; incisional care, including the signs of infection; 
and the signs and symptoms of increased ICP .

Examples of NURSING 
DIAGNOSES Post 
Craniotomy 
• Decreased Intracranial Adaptive Capacity related 
to failure of normal intra-cranial compensatory 
mechanisms. 
• Ineffective Cerebral Tissue Perfusion. 
• Acute Pain related to transmission and 
perception of cutaneous, visceral, muscular, or 
ischemic impulses. 
• Disturbed Body Image related to actual change in 
body structure, function, or appearance.

PATIENT 
EDUCATION 
PLAN Post 
Craniotomy 
Before the patient's discharge, the patient should be 
able to teach back the following topics: 
Before Surgery 
• Pathophysiology and expected outcome of underlying 
disease
• Need for intensive care management after surgery
• Routine preoperative surgical care After Surgery 
• Routine postoperative surgical care 
•

Discharge medications purpose, dosage, and side 
effects
• Incisional care
• Signs and symptoms of infection 
• Signs and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure 
• Measures to compensate for residual deficits 
• Basic rehabilitation techniques 
• Importance of participating in neurologic rehabilitation 
program

Post test 
Mention complication 
of craniotomy 
Mention post operative 
care to patients post 
craniotomy