Prepared by 
Assist professor Dr \Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outline 
• Definition of DKA
• Comparison of Diabetic Ketoacidosis and Hyperglycemic 
Hyperosmolar Syndrome
• Etiology of DKA
• Pathophysiology of DKA
• Clinical Manifestation of DKA
• Laboratory Studies
• Management of DKA

Definition of DKA
Diabetic Ketoacidosis is a life-threatening hyperglycemic
crisis associated with diabetes mellitus result when glucose 
cannot transport to the cells because a lack of insulin.

Etiology of DKA
* Infection is a major reason that diabetic patients progress to DKA.
* Changes in the type of insulin, dosage, or increased metabolic demand can 
precipitate DKA in individuals with type I Diabetes Mellitus.
* Surgery, infection, and trauma because require an increase in insulin intake.
* In young persons with DM, psychological problems combined with eating 
disorders
* DKA also occurs with acute pancreatitis.
* Non diabetes causes of DKA are starvation and alcoholism.

Insulin Deficiency
➢ Insulin is the metabolic key to the transfer of glucose from 
the blood stream into the cell, where it can be used for energy. 
➢ Without insulin, glucose remains in the blood stream, and 
cells are deprived of their energy source. 
➢ When the body lacks insulin and cannot use carbohydrate for 
energy, the liver convert its glycogen stores back to glucose or 
breaking down stored glucose (Glycogenolysis). 
➢ These responses worsen the situation by raising the blood 
glucose level even higher.

Hyperglycemia
Hyperglycemia causes an osmotic diuresis. 
High extracellular glucose levels produce an 
osmatic gradient between the interacellular 
and extracellular spaces, causing fluid to 
move out of the cells.

Fluid Volume Deficit
When the serum glucose exceeds, the renal threshold, it cannot be reabsorbed at the renal 
tubule then glucose is lost through the kidneys and spills into the urine (Glycosuria).
Polyuria and glycosuria
 occur as a result of the osmotic diuresis. As a result, large volumes of water, 
along with sodium, potassium, and phosphorus, are excreted in the urine, 
causing a fluid volume deficit. Osmotic diuresis increases serum osmolality 
and the blood becomes hyperosmolar.
Hyperosmolar cause further fluid shift from the intracellular to the 
extracellular space results in cellular dehydration.

Ketoacidosis
❖ The body begins to use fat and protein stores for energy.
❖ Excessive amount of fatty acid are mobilized from adipose tissue cells and 
transported to the liver. 
❖ The liver in turn, increases the production of ketone bodies for catabolism by 
the muscle. 
❖ As fat metabolism increases, the liver produces too many ketone bodies. 
❖ Ketone bodies accumulate in the blood (ketosis) and excreted in the urine 
(ketouria). 
❖ Accumulation of ketone bodies causes metabolic acidosis. Sever acidosis 
may cause the diabetic patient to lose consciousness.

Acid-Base disturbance
Increase ketones , decrease pH and decrease 
bicarbonate cause metabolic acidosis. 
✓ Breath becomes deep and rapid (kussmaul Respiration) 
to release carbonic acid in the form of Carbon Dioxide 
(CO2).
✓ Acetone is exhale, giving the breath its characteristic of 
fruity odor.

Clinical Manifestation
Patient complaints of 
o Dry mouth                                      
o Malaise
o  Headache                                
o  Polyuria (excessive urination) 
o Polydipsia (excessive thirst)
o Polyphagia (excessive hunger)
o  Dehydration ( dry skin, hypotension, weakness).

Clinical Manifestation
* Ketoacidosis
* Air hunger                                                              -  Acetone breathe odor
* Deep and rapid respirations                                     -   Nausea, vomiting
*  Extreme fatigue, dehydration, and weight loss follow.
* Central nervous system 
* Depression
* Changes in the level of consciousness, can lead quickly to coma.

The physical examination
* Reveals evidence of dehydration, including: flushed dry skin and dry 
buccal membranes
*Skin turgor : that takes longer than 3 seconds to return to its original 
position after the skin has been lifted.
*Sunken eyeballs, resulting from lack of fluid in the interstitial of the 
eyeball, are observed
*Tachycardia and hypotension may signal profound fluid losses.
*Kussmaul respirations are present, and the fruity odor of acetone may 
be detected.

Laboratory Studies
*  Hyperglycemia 
* Urine ketones
* If a blood gas sample is obtained, it can confirm the acid-base imbalance.
The venous blood chemistry panel include: low CO2 in the presence of uncompensated 
metabolic acidosis.
* Serum sodium may be low because water moves from the intracellular space 
into the extracellular (vascular) space.
* The serum potassium level may be elevated, as potassium moves from inside 
the cell to the extracellular space

Management DKA
Treatment goals for DKA include:
➢ Reverse Dehydration
➢ Replace Insulin
➢ Reverse ketoacidosis
➢ Replenish electrolyte

Reversing Dehydration
❖ Patients with DKA are dehydrated and may have lost 5% to 10% 
of body weight of fluid.
❖ Aggressive IV fluid replacement is provided to rehydrate 
intracellular and extracellular compartment and prevent circulatory 
collapse.
❖IV isotonic normal saline (0.9% Sodium Chloride (Na Cl) is 
infused to replenish the vascular deficit and to reverse hypotension. 
❖Severe dehydration, one Litter of normal saline is infused 
immediately and assesses serum osmolality and sodium 
concentration.

Reversing Dehydration
➢ If the serum osmolality is elevated and serum sodium is high (Hypernatremia), infusion 
of hypotonic solution as Na Cl (0.45%) follow the initial saline replacement. 
➢ The replacement infusion includes 20 to 30 mEq of potassium per liter to restore the 
intracellular potassium.
➢ Careful attention must be paid to patients with kidney failure or cardiopulmonary disease 
during fluids replacement to avoid fluids overload. 
➢ After blood glucose level decrease to 200 mg/dl, the infusion solution is changed to a 
50/50 mix of hypotonic saline and 5% dextrose. Dextrose prevents unexpected 
hypoglycemia.

Insulin Administration
❖ Administer an initial IV bolus of regular insulin at 0.1 unit for each kilogram of body
weight. A continuous infusion of regular insulin at 0.1 unit /kg/hour with IV infusion (if 
patient weight 70 kg , infusion of insulin 7 unit per hour). 
❖ Blood glucose level should be checked every hour to assess plasma glucose level and its 
decrease of between 50 to 70 mg/dl per hour.
❖ The insulin rate may be decreased to 0.05 to 0.1 unit /kg/hour (usually 3 to 6 units for 
adult who are receiving continuous IV insulin), after the glucose level is decreased to 200 
mg/dl, the acidosis has been corrected and rehydration has been achieved.

Reversing Ketoacidosis
➢ Adequate hydration and insulin replacement usually correct acidosis but many patients 
may require bicarbonate replacement if pH value is less than 7.10. 
➢The bicarbonate deficit can be calculated and replaced IV over several hours to 
raise the level at least to the 10 to 12 mEq/L range.
➢Sodium bicarbonate should be administered by slow IV infusion over several 
hours. It is administered as a bolus injection only in the case of cardiac arrest. 
➢Sodium bicarbonate administration can cause a rapid reduction in plasma
potassium concentration and sodium overload.

Replenishing Electrolytes
❑ Low serum potassium (Hypokalemia) occurs as insulin promotes the return of potassium into the cell and 
metabolic acidosis is reversed. 
❑ The potassium level must be 3.3 mEq or greater before administering insulin. Potassium chloride 
is administered as soon as the potassium level falls below the normal. Potassium is usually replaced 
at concentrations of 20 to 40 mEq/L of IV fluid, depending on the serum potassium level.
❑ Phosphate replacement is recommended if phosphate level is less than 1mg/dl. 
❑ Patients who are receiving IV phosphate therapy should be watched carefully for signs of tetany 
(tingling around the mouth or in the hands, neuromuscular irritability, carpopedal spasm, or even 
seizures). Tetany can occur because phosphate lowers the level of circulating calcium.

Reestablishing Metabolic Function
▪ Gastric motility is greatly impaired in DKA ,Gastric distention with dark, hemo-
positive fluid and vomiting is common. Abdominal pain, tenderness, and a paralytic ileus 
may also occur due to DKA. 
▪ The patient may need a nasogastric tube to decompress the stomach. This increases 
comfort and decreases the risk for aspiration. 
▪ Patients should not eat or drink in this phase of illness. Ice chips may decrease thirst. 
Later, when distention lessens and motility returns, oral intake begins in order to provide 
the complex nutritional requirements for recovery

Nursing Management Goals
✓ Administering fluids, insulin, and electrolytes
✓ Monitoring response to therapy
✓ Surveillance for complications
✓ Providing patient education

Administering Fluids, Insulin, and Electrolytes
❖ Rapid intravenous fluid replacement requires the use of a volumetric pump. 
❖ Insulin is administered intravenously to patients who are severely 
dehydrated or have poor peripheral perfusion, to ensure effective absorption. 
❖ Patients with DKA are kept on NPO status (nothing by mouth) until the 
hyperglycemia is under control. 
❖ Assess the patient's response and the laboratory data for changes relating to 
blood glucose levels.
❖ The critical care nurse is responsible for monitoring the rate of plasma 
glucose decline in response to insulin.

Administering Fluids, Insulin, and Electrolytes
❖The goal is to achieve a fall in glucose level of 
approximately 50 to 75 mg/dL hourly.
❖Monitoring blood glucose, potassium, and often blood 
gases on an hourly basis is considerable. 
❖When the blood glucose level falls to 200 mg/dL, a 5% 
dextrose solution (D5W) with 0.45% Na Cl solution is 
infused to prevent hypoglycemia.

❖The regular insulin drip is not discontinued until the
ketoacidosis subsides, as identified by absence of ketones 
and a normal pH by arterial or venous blood gas analysis.
❖ Insulin is given subcutaneously after glucose levels, 
dehydration, hypotension, and acid-base balance are 
normalized and the patient is in stable condition and taking 
an oral diet.

Monitoring Response to Therapy
❖ Assess occurrence of hypoglycemia during the transition period.
❖ Discontinuing the insulin and intravenous dextrose infusion, a 
patient receives a subcutaneous dose of insulin and is expected to 
eat a meal.
❖ If the patient is unable to eat an adequate amount, hypoglycemia 
results from the administration of subcutaneous insulin without 
adequate glucose.

Surveillance for Complications
* Fluid volume overload
* Hypoglycemia
* Hyperkalemia
* Hyponatremia
* Cerebral edema
* Infection

Nursing Diagnosis Diabetic Ketoacidosis
• Decreased Cardiac Output related to alterations in preload, 
• Deficient Fluid Volume related to absolute loss, 
• Anxiety related to threat to biologic, psychologic, and social integrity 
• Disturbed Body Image related to functional dependence on life- sustainino 
technology, 
• Ineffective Coping related to situational crisis and personal 
vulnerability
• Powerlessness related to lack of control progression, 
• Deficient over current situation or disease progression, 
• Deficient Knowledge related to lack of previous exposure to information

Comparison between Diabetic and Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar Syndrome
Characteristics
and Laboratory Tests
DKA HHS
Cause
Onset Precipitating factors
Insufficient exogenous glucose for 
glucose needs
Sudden (hours)
Noncompliance with type 1 
diabetes therapy, illness, surgery, 
decreased activity
Insufficient exogenous/ endogenous 
insulin for glucose needs
Slow, insidious (days, weeks)
Recent acute illness in older
patient; therapeutic procedures

Characteristics
and Laboratory Tests
DKA HHS
Mortality (%) Patients affected 
Clinical manifestations
9-14
Patients with type I diabetes
Dry mouth, polydipsia, polyuria, 
polyphagia, dehydration, dry skin, 
hypotension, weakness 
Ketoacidosis, air hunger, acetone 
breath odor, respirations deep and 
rapid, nausea, vomiting
10-50
Patients with type II diabetes 
Mental confusion, tachycardia, 
changes in level of consciousness
No ketosis, 
no breath odor, 
respirations rapid and shallow
, usually mild nausea/vomiting
Comparison between Diabetic and Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar Syndrome

Laboratory tests DKA HHS
Glucose (mg/dL)
Ketones pH Osmolality (m0sm/L) 
Sodium
Potassium (K+) Bicarbonate 
Phosphorus
300-800
Strongly positive
<7.3
<350
Normal or low
Normal, low, or elevated (total body K+ 
depleted)
<15 mEq/L
Low, normal, or elevated (may decrease 
after insulin therapy)
600-2000
Normal or mildly elevated Normal
>350
Normal or elevated
Low, normal, or elevated Normal
Low, normal, or elevated (may 
decrease after insulin
therapy)
Urine acetone Strong Absent or mild
Comparison between Diabetic and Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar Syndrome

MCQ about DKA
Which condition is identified as a major precipitating factor that causes diabetic patients to progress into DKA?
A. Excessive exercise without dietary adjustment.
B. Acute infection.
C. High protein intake.
D. Over-hydration with hypotonic fluids.
When managing DKA, at what blood glucose level should the IV solution be changed to include 5% Dextrose?
A. 300 mg/dL
B. 100 mg/dL
C. 500 mg/dL
D. 200 mg/dL