Prepared by 
Assist professor Dr \Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outlines:
▪ Description
▪ Pathophysiology
▪ Source of Ammonia
▪ Others cause of Hepatic Encephalopathy
▪ Stage of Hepatic Encephalopathy
▪ Clinical Manifestations
▪ Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
▪ Management of Hepatic Encephalopathy

Hepatic Encephalopathy
 Hepatic Encephalopathy is a life-threatening 
complication of liver disease that occurs with profound 
liver failure. It is the neuropsychiatric manifestation of 
hepatic failure associated with portal hypertension and 
the shunting of blood from the portal venous system 
into the systemic circulation.

Causes of hepatic encephalopathy
Two major alterations underlie its development in acute and chronic liver 
disease includes hepatic insufficiency and portal systemic shunting.
Hepatic Insufficiency may result in encephalopathy because of the 
inability of the liver to detoxify toxic by products of metabolism.
Portal Systemic Shunting in which collateral vessels develop as a result 
of portal hypertension, allows elements of the portal blood (laden with 
potentially toxic substances usually extracted by the liver) to enter the 
systemic circulation.

Causes of hepatic encephalopathy
Ammonia is considered the major etiologic
factor in the development of encephalopathy. It 
enters the brain and excites peripheral receptors 
on astrocyte cells causing depression of the
central nervous system. Ammonia inhibits
neurotransmission and synaptic regulation,
producing sleep and behavior patterns change
associated with hepatic encephalopathy.

Source of Ammonia
❖ GI bleeding (bleeding esophageal varices, 
chronic GI bleeding).
❖A high-protein diet.
❖Bacterial infection or uremia.
❖The ingestion of ammonium salts.
❖Presence of alkalosis or hypokalemia, increased 
amounts of ammonia is absorbed from the GI tract 
and from the renal tubular fluid.

Others cause of Hepatic Encephalopathy:
✓ Excessive diuresis
✓  Dehydration, infections
✓ Surgery
✓ Fever
✓ Some medications (sedatives, tranquilizers, 
analgesics, and diuretics that cause potassium loss).

Pathophysiology of hepatic encephalopathy

Stages of Hepatic Encephalopathy
Stage One: 
• Normal level of consciousness with periods of 
lethargy 
•  Euphoria; reversal of day–night sleep patterns. 
• Asterixis; impaired writing and ability to draw 
line figures 
•  Normal EEG.

Stages of Hepatic Encephalopathy
Stage Two: 
❑ Increased drowsiness , disorientation
❑ inappropriate behavior
❑ mood swings;  agitation. 
❑ Asterixis
❑ Fetor hepaticus 
❑  Abnormal EEG with generalized slowing.

Stages of Hepatic Encephalopathy
Stage Three: 
▪ Stuporous; difficult to arouse
▪  Sleeps most of time
▪ Marked confusion
▪ Incoherent speech. 
▪ Asterixis, Increased deep tendon reflexes; Rigidity of extremities 
▪  Markedly abnormal EEG.

Stages of Hepatic Encephalopathy
Stage Four: 
▪ Comatose; may not respond to painful stimuli. 
▪ Absence of Asterixis
▪ Absence of deep tendon reflexes
▪ Flaccidity of extremities 
▪ Markedly abnormal EEG.

Clinical Manifestations
❑ Minor mental changes and motor disturbances. 
 The patient appears slightly confused and has alterations in mood and 
sleep patterns. The patient tends to sleep during the day and has restlessness 
and insomnia at night.
❑As hepatic encephalopathy progresses, the patient may become
difficult to awaken and completely disoriented with respect to time
and place. With further progression, the patient lapses into frank
coma and may have seizures.

* Asterixis (flapping tremor of the hands) 
may be seen in stage II Encephalopathy. 
  Asterixis Simple tasks, such as 
handwriting, become difficult. A 
handwriting or drawing sample (star 
figure)
* Fetor Hepaticus (a sweet, slightly fecal
odor to the breath that is presumed to be 
of intestinal origin) may be noticed. 
Clinical Manifestations

Assessment and Diagnostic Findings
The electroencephalogram 
(EEG) shows a generalized 
slowing, an increase in the 
amplitude of brain waves 
and characteristic triphasic 
waves.

Management of Hepatic Encephalopathy
❖ Initiating ammonia-lowering therapy such as:
 Lactulose: It acts by several mechanisms that promote the excretion of 
ammonia in the stool: these mechanisms are:
(1) Ammonia is kept in the ionized state, resulting in a decrease in colon pH, reveres in the 
normal passage of ammonia from the colon to the blood.
(2) Evacuation of the bowel takes place, which decreases the ammonia absorbed from the 
colon.
(3) The fecal flora is changed to organisms that do not produce ammonia from urea.
* The patient receiving lactulose is monitored closely for the development 
of watery diarrheal stools, because they indicate a medication overdose.

Lactulose:
Side effects of Lactulose include intestinal bloating and cramps, which 
usually disappear within a week. To mask the sweet taste, which 
some patients dislike, it can be diluted with fruit juice.
Nursing Consideration: The patient is closely monitored for
hypokalemia and dehydration. Other laxatives are not prescribed 
during lactulose administration because their effects disturb dosage 
regulation.
Route: Lactulose may be administered by nasogastric tube or enema 
for patients who are comatose or for those in whom oral 
administration is contraindicated or impossible.

Initiating ammonia-lowering therapy such as:
Antibiotics as Neomycin: Metronidazole (Flagyl), and Rifaximin (Xifaxan) 
have been used to reduce levels of ammonia-forming bacteria in the colon.
❑ Action: is broad – spectrum antibiotic that destroy, normal bacteria found in 
bowel, thereby decreasing protein break down and ammonia production.
❑ Route: Neomycin is given orally every 4 to 6 hours.
❑ Side effect: This drug is toxic to the kidney and cannot be given to patients with renal 
failure.
❑Nursing Consideration: Daily renal function studies are monitored when Neomycin is 
administered.

Additional Principles of Management of Hepatic Encephalopathy
➢ Assessing neurological status frequently.
➢ Monitoring mental status by keeping a daily record of 
handwriting and arithmetic performance.
➢ Recording intake and output and body weight daily.
➢ Measuring and recording vital signs every 4 hours.
➢ Potential sites of infection (peritoneum, lungs) are assessed 
frequently, and abnormal findings are reported promptly.

Additional Principles of Management of Hepatic Encephalopathy
➢ Serum ammonia level is monitored daily.
➢ Protein intake is moderately restricted in patients who 
are comatose or who have encephalopathy that is 
refractory to lactulose and antibiotic therapy.

➢ Long-term restriction of dietary protein to less than 1 g/kg
daily should be avoided.
➢ If animal protein precipitates encephalopathy, vegetable or 
dairy proteins may be used as most patients can tolerate a 
diet of vegetable protein up to 120 g/day.
➢ Patients and families are advised about foods that are high 
in protein (meat, eggs), which may need to be eliminated 
from the diet for short term to reduce production of 
ammonia.
▪ Enteral feeding is provided for patients whose encephalopathic 
state persists.
▪ Reduction in the absorption of ammonia from the GI
 tract is accomplished by the use of gastric suction, enemas, 
or oral antibiotics.
▪ Electrolyte status is monitored and corrected if abnormal.
▪ Sedatives, tranquilizers, and analgesic medications are discontinued.
Benzodiazepin eantagonists such as Flumazenil (Romazicon) may be 
administered to improve encephalopathy, whether or not the patient has 
previously taken benzodiazepines. This action may have short-term 
efficacy because patients with hepatic encephalopathy have an increased 
concentration of benzodiazepine receptors

Nutritional Management
▪ Prevent the formation and absorption of toxins, principally ammonia, from the 
intestine.
▪ Keep daily protein intake between 1.0 and 1.5 g/kg, depending on the degree 
of decompensation.
*Avoid protein restriction if possible, even in those with 
encephalopathy. If necessary, implement temporary restriction of 0.5 
to 0.8 g/kg.
▪ For patients who are truly protein-intolerant, provide additional nitrogen 
in the form of an amino acid supplement.
* Provide small, frequent meals and an evening snack of
 complex carbohydrates to avoid protein loading.
* Substitute vegetable protein for animal protein in as high a percentage 
as possible.

Nursing Management
* Maintaining a safe environment to prevent injury, bleeding and infection.
* The nurse administers the prescribed treatments and monitors the patient for 
the numerous potential complications.
* The nurse encourages deep breathing and position changes to prevent 
the development of atelectasis, pneumonia and other respiratory
complications.
* Despite aggressive pulmonary care, patients may develop respiratory 
compromise. They may require intubation and mechanical ventilation 
to protect the airway and they are frequently admitted to the ICU

Teaching Patients Self Care
❖ If the patient has recovered from hepatic encephalopathy and discharged 
home, the nurse instructs the family to watch for slight signs of recurrent 
encephalopathy.
❖ In the acute phase of hepatic encephalopathy, dietary protein may be reduced 
for a brief period to 0.8 to 1.0 g/kg per day.
❖ During recovery and in the home situation, it is important to the patient in 
maintenance of a moderate protein, high calorie diet.
❖ Protein may then be added in 10 g increments every 3 to 5 days if mental 
status is improving.
❖Any relapse (worsening neurologic assessment) is treated by returning 
protein intake to the previous level. The limits of tolerance are usually 
1.0 to
❖ 1.5 g/kg per day.
❖
❖ * Continued use of Lactulose in the home environment is not 
uncommon, and the patient and family should closely monitor its 
efficacy and side effects. They should also be cautioned that 
constipation can precipitate encephalopathy and should be 
prevented through the prescribed use of Lactulose.
❖ *Use of vegetable rather than animal protein may be indicated in 
patients whose total daily protein tolerance is less than 1 g/kg. 
Vegetable protein intake may result in improved nitrogen balance 
without precipitating or advancing hepatic encephalopathy
❖
❖