Increased 
Intracranial 
Pressure (ICp)
Prepared by / 
Dr /Ghada elsayed

Outlines 
❖ Introduction
❖Definition
❖ Pathophysiology 
❖ Causes of Increased Intracranial Pressure 
❖ Assessment 
❖ Management

Pre test 
Mention causes of increase 
ICP 
Mention symptoms 
associated with increase ICP

Increased 
Intracranial 
Pressure (ICP)
Many neurological problems are associated 
with increased ICP , such as brain injury and 
stroke. 
Sustained increases in ICP compound the 
extent of brain injury and can be life-
threatening. 
Therefore, it is important to assess and 
maintain ICP within normal limits. 
Normal ICP ranges from 0 to 15 mm Hg.

Definition 
Increased ICP is a pressure of 20 mm Hg or 
greater persisting for 5 minutes or longer.

Pathophysiology
• The rigid cranial vault contains three types of non-
compressible contents:
• brain tissue, blood, and CSF .
• The pressure exerted by the combined volumes of these three 
components is ICP . 
• If the volume of any one of these components increases, the 
volume of one or both of  the other compartments must 
decrease proportionally or an increase in ICP occurs.

• This compensation is termed compliance with adequate
compliance; an increase in intracranial volume is
compensated by displacement of CSF into the spinal
subarachnoid space, displacement of blood into the venous
sinuses, or both.
• The ICP remains normal despite increases in volume.

As compensatory mechanisms are exhausted, a small 
increase in volume leads to a large increase in ICP .
As compliance decreases, ICP increases and 
Cerebral Blood Flow (CBF) decreases.
When CBF decreases, the brain becomes hypoxic, 
carbon dioxide levels increase, and acidosis occurs.
In response to these changes, the cerebral blood 
vessels dilate to increase CBF .

• This compensatory response further increases intracranial volume, 
creating a vicious cycle that can be life-threatening.
• Sustained increases in ICP can lead to herniation, which is caused by 
shifting of brain tissue from an area of high
• pressure to one of lower pressure.
• Along with Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP), the ICP determines Cerebral 
Perfusion Pressure (CPP), which is the pressure required to perfuse the 
brain.
• Cerebral Perfusion Pressure is calculated as the difference between 
MAP and ICP (CPP = MAP- ICP).

Normal CPP in an adult is between 60 and 100 mm Hg; it must be 
maintained at 70 mm Hg .
Any factor that decreases MAP and/or increases ICP decreases the CPP .
Ischemia or infarction can occur if the CPP is inadequate. 
Measures to promote adequate CPP include lowering of increased ICP or, if 
this is not possible, increasing MAP to balance the effects of ICP on CPP .

Causes of 
Increased 
Intracranial 
Pressure 
cerebral edema It is an increase in water 
content of brain tissue, if uncorrected; it 
may lead to increase ICP .
increased Cerebral Blood Volume 
(CBV), and increased CSF
Head injury 
Hypertension 
Intracranial hemorrhage

Decreased cerebral oxygenation leads to cerebral vasodilation to improve oxygen 
delivery. 
Hypercapnia also causes vasodilation in the brain. 
Any factor that results in hypoxemia or hypercapnia, such as ineffective ventilation, 
airway obstruction, or endotracheal suctioning, can contribute to an increase in ICP .
Cerebral Blood Flow may increase to enhance oxygen supply in response to increased 
metabolic demands.
Several factors increase oxygen demands, including fever, physical activity, pain, 
shivering, and seizures. 
Grouping nursing activities together (e.g., bathing, suctioning, turning), may also 
increase metabolic demands.

Increased Cerebrospinal Fluid: Hydrocephalus, an increase 
in CSF , can increase ICP .
Hydrocephalus may occur in any condition in which CSF flow 
or absorption is blocked, such as subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(SAH) or infection (meningitis, encephalitis), or when excess 
CSF is produced.

Assessment of Increased Intracranial Pressure Perform a careful 
neurologic examination 
• with emphasis on Level Of Consciousness (LOC) and motor and 
cranial nerve function.
•  Vital signs are part of the routine assessment.
•  Hypertension is common early sign with increased ICP and 
represents a compensatory mechanism to augment Cerebral 
Perfusion Pressure (CPP).
•  Increased ICP is manifested by deterioration in all aspects of 
neurological functioning.
•  Level of consciousness decreases as ICP rises.

Initially, the patient may present with evidence of restlessness and 
confusion. 
This then decompensate into lower levels of consciousness, ranging from 
lethargy to coma.
Pupillary reactions begin to diminish, and change in pupillary size.
Motor function also declines, and the patient begins to show abnormal 
motor activity (abnormal flexion or extension).

• Gushing Triad is a late sign of increased ICP and consists of
•  systolic hypertension with a widening pulse pressure, 
bradycardia, and irregular respirations. 
• It often signifies irreversible damage. 
• Monitoring Techniques Invasive monitoring of ICP , cerebral 
oxygenation, and other physiologic parameters may be used to 
augment the clinical assessment.

Intracranial Pressure 
Monitoring: 
• ICP monitoring is used to correlate objective data 
with the clinical picture and to determine 
cerebral perfusion.
• Cerebral Oxygenation Monitoring: CBF and brain 
oxygen utilization may be monitored by jugular 
oxygen saturation (SjO2).
•  Other Physiologic Monitoring: Hemodynamic 
monitoring may be used to monitor fluid status 
and to assist in maintaining adequate cerebral 
perfusion. 
• Using pulse Oximetry for continuous monitoring 
of arterial oxygen saturation Continuous bedside 
electroencephalographic (EEG) .

Diagnostic Testing 
Arterial Blood Gases (ABGs), Sp02, end tidal carbon dioxide.
Complete Blood Count (CBC), with an emphasis on hematocrit, hemoglobin, and platelets.
Coagulation profile, including prothrombin time, International Normalized Ratio (INR), and 
activated partial thromboplastin time (a PTT) because brain injury may induce a coagulopathy 
Electrolytes: Blood Urea Nitrogen, Creatinine, liver function and serum osmolality.

Radiological studies and other diagnostic tests 
that may be performed on patient with ICP as:
Computed Tomography (CT); 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI); 
CBF monitoring
EEG.

Management of 
Increased 
Intracranial 
Pressure 
Medical and Nursing Interventions (Nonsurgical) 
The goal of management is to maintain an ICP of 
less than 20 mm Hg while maintaining the CPP 60 
to 70 mm Hg.
If the ICP is elevated, therapy is instituted to 
decrease ICP and then identify the cause of 
increased ICP .
Once the cause is discovered, management is 
centered on permanently decreasing the high ICP , 
maintaining CPP , maintaining the airway, providing 
ventilation and oxygenation, and decreasing the 
metabolic demands placed on the injured brain.

Nursing Management 
of Increased 
Intracranial Pressure 
• Position the patient to 
minimize ICP and maximize 
CPP . 
• Elevate the head of the 
bed to 30 degrees and keep 
the head in a neutral midline 
position to facilitate venous 
drainage and decrease the 
risk of venous obstruction. 
However, care must be 
taken to evaluate BP 
response to head elevation. 
Raising the head of the bed 
may decrease MAP , thereby 
decreasing CPP . 
• Hemodynamically 
unstable patients may need 
to be cared for in a flat 
position. 
Patients with increased ICP 
can be turned from side to 
side.
However, during any 
position change or change 
in elevation of the head

It is important to monitor and document the patient’s 
individualized cerebral and hemodynamic response.
• If the CPP does not return to the baseline value 
within 5 minutes after the position change, reposition 
the patient to the position that maximized CPP .
• Suction the patient only when necessary because 
endotracheal suctioning is associated with 
hypoxemia. 
Preoxygenate the patient with 100% oxygen before, 
between suction attempts and for 1 minute after the 
procedure.

Limit each suction pass to less than 10 seconds, with no 
more than two suction passes. 
Maintain the head in a neutral position during the 
suctioning procedure. 
• Spacing nursing care activities allows for rest between 
activities because several nursing activities are 
associated with increases in ICP as (turning, 
repositioning, and hygiene care). 
Elevated ICP resulting from nursing care is usually 
temporary, and the ICP should return to the resting 
baseline value within a few minutes.

Assess the patient’s physiologic 
response to visitors; family presence 
has been shown to decrease ICP .
However, caution family members to 
avoid excess stimulation of the patient 
or unpleasant conversations that may 
emotionally stimulate the patient.

Medical 
Management 
of Increased 
ICP 
Medical management of increased ICP
Corticosteroids
Adequate oxygenation and ventilation 
• Osmotic and loop diuretics 
• Fluid administration 
• Maintenance of BP
• Reduction of metabolic demands.

• Corticosteroids are useful for reducing cerebral edema 
associated with brain tumors and meningitis.
•  Adequate Oxygenation and ventilation: The goal is to 
maintain a Pao2 above 80 mm Hg and to ensure that oxygen 
delivery to the brain exceeds oxygen consumption.
•  A Pao2 below 50 mm Hg can precipitate increased ICP . 
• For many patients with increased ICP , short-term 
management of the airway is accomplished by an end 
tracheal tube and mechanical ventilation.
•

Positive end expiratory pressure may be added to 
facilitate oxygenation; however, it must be used 
with extreme caution because it may prevent 
venous outflow and further increase ICP . 
A tracheostomy tube may be required for long-
term ventilator management.
In addition, adequate hematocrit and hemoglobin 
levels are maintained to promote oxygenation.

Management of Carbon Dioxide: 
Hyperventilation decreases PaCO2, which causes 
vasoconstriction of the cerebral arteries and a reduction 
of CBF .
Hyperventilation is used to decrease ICP for short 
periods when acute neurologic deterioration is occurring 
(i.e., herniation). 
If the PaCO2 level is lowered to less than 35 mm Hg for 
an extended period, Oxygen delivery at the cellular level 
should be evaluated with the use of a jugular bulb or 
cerebral tissue oxygen monitor.

Osmotic and loop diuretics: Osmotic and loop 
diuretics are administered to reduce cerebral 
brain volume by removing fluid from the brain’s 
extracellular compartment.
Osmotic diuretics, such as Mannitol or 
hypertonic saline draw water from the brain to 
the plasma by creating an osmotic gradient, 
thereby decreasing ICP . 
The effects of decreasing ICP and increasing 
CPP occur within minutes after the infusion.

Mannitol is given at a dose of 0.5-1 g/kg IV 
over 5-10 min, then 0.25- 2.0 g/kg IV bolus 
every 4-12 hr as needed depending on ICP 
Side effects of osmotic diuretics include 
hypotension, electrolyte disturbances, and 
rebound increased ICP . 
If Mannitol is used, the patient must have 
adequate intravascular volume to prevent 
hypotension and secondary brain injury.

Mannitol is contraindicated in patients 
with acute kidney injury because it is not 
metabolized and is excreted unchanged 
in the urine.
Loop diuretics (Furosemide, torsemide, 
bumetanide, ethacrynic acid) decrease 
ICP by removing sodium and water from 
injured brain cells. These agents also 
decrease CSF formation.

Optimal Fluid Administration: Fluid administration is provided to 
optimize MAP , maintain intravascular volume, and normalize CPP .
Normal saline solution (0.9%), an isotonic solution, is recommended 
for volume resuscitation. 
Hypotonic solutions are avoided to prevent an increase in cerebral 
edema.
Strict measurement of intake and output while monitoring serum 
sodium, potassium, and osmolarity is required.
Colloids or blood products are administered if needed, to restore 
volume and maintain adequate hematocrit and hemoglobin levels. 
Hemodynamic monitoring may be used to optimize fluid 
administration.

Blood Pressure Management: BP must be carefully 
controlled in a patient with increased ICP .
Usually, the MAP is kept between 70 and 90 mm Hg. 
However, it is critical to monitor the ICP and MAP 
collectively to sustain an adequate CPP of at least 70 mm 
Hg. 
• Hypotension decreases CBF , which leads to cerebral 
ischemia.
 When hypotension occurs or ICP cannot be reduced, 
manipulating the systolic BP with vasopressor medications 
and fluids may be needed to achieve an adequate CPP .

• Hypertension (>160 mm Hg 
systolic) can worsen cerebral 
edema. 
If necessary, systolic BP is lowered 
with antihypertensive medications 
such as labetalol.
This Beta Blocker decreases the 
sympathetic response and 
catecholamine release associated 
with neurologic injury.

Nicardipine is a calcium channel blocker medication that does not affect cerebral vasculature; it is 
very effective in providing faster and tighter control of BP than other antihypertensive medications.
Reducing Metabolic Demands: Several therapies may be required to reduce metabolic demands.
These include temperature control, sedation, seizure prophylaxis, neuromuscular blockade, and 
barbiturate therapy.
Temperature Control: Lowering body temperature to normal from a hyperthermic state or inducing 
hypothermia decreases cerebral metabolism, blood flow, and volume, thereby decreasing ICP .

Body temperature may be controlled noninvasively with the use of a cooling 
blanket or skin pads placed in direct contact with the skin (external cooling) 
or invasively by using a catheter placed in a large vein intravascular cooling).
Target temperatures for induced hypothermia range from 34° to 35 C; these 
temperatures are maintained for 24 to 72 hours, followed by gradual 
rewarming.

Sedation: Patients are often sedated to lower increased 
ICP related to agitation, restlessness, or resistance to 
mechanical ventilation.
Benzodiazepines are given for sedation and do not 
affect CBF or ICP . Propofol is a sedative-hypnotic 
medication that reduces cerebral metabolism and ICP .
It is a short-acting medication with a rapid onset that is 
given by continuous infusion. 
Morphine or fentanyl can be administered for analgesia 
and sedation in a low- dose continuous infusion or in 
small frequent intravenous (IV) boluses.

Neuromuscular Blockade and Barbiturate Therapy: 
Neuromuscular blockade is considered for patients 
unresponsive to other treatments.
Barbiturates are given selectively to reduce ICP refractory to 
other treatments. 
Pentobarbital is the most common medication used. 
Patients receiving neuromuscular blockade or barbiturate 
therapy require hemodynamic monitoring, mechanical 
ventilation, and intensive nursing management. 
Surgical Interventions: Surgical intervention may be 
required to remove a mass or lesion that is causing the 
increased ICP .

Post test 
Mention causes of 
ICP
Mention diagnostic 
test for diagnosis 
increase ICP