Liver Dialysis
Prepared by
Assist prof Dr\ Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outlines
• Introduction
• Liver dialysis Definition
• Liver dialysis hypothesis
• Indications for liver dialysis
• General goals for liver dialysis
• Dialysis Therapy places
• liver dialysis machines
• Liver dialysis devices
• The operating princibles (procedure)
• Clinical effeciency of liver dialysis
• Side effects of liver transplantation

Introduction 
The lack of liver detoxification as well as the loss of metabolic and
regulatory functions of the liver leads to life-threatening complications,
During the acute phase of their disease, a substantial number of patients
are treated using extracorporeal blood purification devices. Besides
regular hemodialysis, the Molecular Adsorbent Recycling System
(MARS) is used with increasing frequency. In that time, liver dialysis is
utilized in the appropriate cases to support the patient through his/her
liver failure until transplantation can be performed.

Definition of Liver dialysis
is a detoxification treatment for liver failure and
has shown promise for patients with hepatorenal
syndrome. It is similar to hemodialysis and
based on the same principles. Like a
bioartificial liver device, it is a form of artificial
extracorporeal liver support.

Liver dialysis hypothesis
❑A critical issue of the clinical syndrome in liver failure is the
accumulation of toxins not cleared by the failing liver. Based
on this hypothesis, the removal of
❖Lipophilic
❖Albumin-bound substances such as bilirubin, bile acids,
❖Metabolites of aromatic amino acids, medium-chain fatty
acids and cytokines should be beneficial to the clinical
course of a patient in liver failure.
❑Hemodialysis is used for renal failure and primarily removes
water soluble toxins, however it does not remove toxins bound
to albumin that accumulate in liver failure.

Indications for liver dialysis
• Acute hepatic encephalopathy, due to worsening of chronic liver disease (acute-on-
chronic) or sudden-onset liver failure (fulminant hepatic failure) .
• Severe drug overdose, as with acetaminophen, tricyclic antidepressants,
•Acute decompensation of chronic liver diseases
• Acute liver failure and liver dysfunction
• Poisoning of various types including drug overdose
• Liver transplant failure
•Multiple organ failure

The goal of the liver dialysis
• Complete recovery of liver function following recompensation
• Bridging short-term or long-term waiting times until liver
transplantation.
• Increasing the survival rate of liver transplants.
• Improving the quality of the patient’s life.

Dialysis Therapy can be performed in
• Transplantation centers
• Intensive care units
• In dialysis units.

liver dialysis machines
There are broadly two categories of liver
dialysis machines:
1. One that contains liver cells (biological)
2. One without any living cells (non-
biological).
The non-biological version is simpler and
cheaper, but it merely provides detoxifying
functions without any contribution of the
normal liver synthetic function.

Liver dialysis devices
Artificial detoxification devices currently under clinical evaluation
include the
1. Molecular Adsorbent Recirculating System (MARS)
2. Single Pass Albumin Dialysis (SPAD)
3. Prometheus system.

Molecular Adsorbents Recirculation System (MARS)
The MARS is the best known extracorporal liver
dialysis system and has existed for approximately ten
years.
It consists of two separate dialysis circuits.
❑The first circuit consists of human serum
albumin, is in contact with the patient's blood
through a semipermeable membrane .
❑Two special filters to clean the albumin after it
has absorbed toxins from the patient's

The operating principles (procedure)
The MARS Liver Support Therapy is based on the principle of Dialysis.
o The patients blood flows through a catheter into an extracorporeal circuit equipped with a MARS flux
Dialyzer made of special hollow fibres, guaranteeing a high selectivity for liver toxins.
o The blood does not get dialysed against normal dialysate but against a 20% albumin solution, albumin being
a transport molecule playing an important role in human detoxification.
o The albumin dialysate will bind the toxins from the blood albumin through the membrane without
exchanging any albumin molecules.
o The albumin dialysate is regenerated in a closed circuit through a second dialyser and special adsorber for
repeated toxin transport.

Figure 1: The MARS Circuit: Removal of Water-soluble and Albumin-bound 
Toxins

Single Pass Albumin Dialysis (SPAD)
SPAD is a simple method of albumin dialysis using 
standard renal replacement therapy machines without an 
additional perfusion pump system: The patient’s blood 
flows through a circuit with a high-flux hollow fiber 
hemodiafilter, identical to that used in the MARS 
system. The other side of this membrane is cleansed with 
an albumin solution in counter-directional flow, which is 
discarded after passing the filter. Hemodialysis can be 
performed in the first circuit via the same high-flux 
hollow fibers.

Prometheus
The Prometheus system  is a new device based on the combination of 
albumin adsorption with high-flux hemodialysis after selective filtration of 
the albumin fraction through a specific polysulfon filter (AlbuFlow). It has 
been studied in a group of eleven patients with hepatorenal syndrome 
(acute-on-chronic liver failure and accompanying renal failure). The 
treatment for two consecutive days for more than four hours significantly 
improved serum levels of conjugated bilirubin, bile acids, ammonia, 
cholinesterase, creatinine, urea and blood pH. Prometheus was proven to be 
a safe supportive therapy for patients with liver failure.

Clinical efficiency of liver dialysis 
• Hyperbilirubinemia: Clinically, bilirubin, which is strongly bound 
to albumin, is considered to be an indicator for the accumulation of 
albumin-bound substances in the case of 
Intrahepatic cholestasias. For the first time, both bilirubin and 
other albumin-bound substances can be removed selectively with direct 
effect on hepatic cholestasis.

Clinical efficiency of liver dialysis 
Hepatic Encephalopathy/Brain Edema: Ammonia is considered to 
be the main cause of hepatic encephalopathy (hepatic coma) and brain 
edema that develops as complications in liver failure. using dialysis 
therapy. As a result, the patients wake up, and the degree of 
encephalopathy is reduced.

Clinical efficiency of liver dialysis 
An increased intracranial pressure causes brain stem damage; it 
is also one of the most frequent causes of death in cases of acute liver 
failure. Glutamine accumulates as a metabolic product of increased 
utilisation of ammonia, causing astrocytes or other cells to swell. This in 
turn results in brain edema. dialysis is able to stop this process and/or to 
reduce the intracranial pressure.

Clinical efficiency of liver dialysis 
Hemodynamics: Various vasoactive substances, such as plasma nitric 
oxide (NO) are thought to be responsible for the characteristic hemodynamic 
situation in cases of liver failure. dialysis removes NO from the blood and 
reduces its production. This is considered to be the cause of significant 
increases in systemic vascular resistance (SVRI) and mean arterial pressure 
(MAP) following dialysis. At the same time, the heart returns to normal with 
a decrease in cardiac index and the local supply of blood to the liver, brain 
and kidneys is improved; with a reduction in pressure in the portal vein.

Clinical efficiency of liver dialysis 
Renal Function: If the liver failure is accompanied by a deteriorating 
renal function, the prognosis is poor, with the failure of an additional organ 
system being a further step towards the development of multiple organ 
failure. Various studies have shown that this development can be reversed 
and even avoided using dialysis. This may be attributed to an improvement in 
the systemic and the local hemodynamic situation, but also perhaps to a direct 
effect of dialysis Therapy.

Clinical efficiency of liver dialysis 
Protein Synthesis: Both the detoxification and the synthesis functions of the 
liver begin to improve on removal of albumin bound toxins in the presence of an 
adequate regenerative capacity  in the damaged liver.
There is positive effect on patient neurologic status and physiologic status. 
Clinical experience suggests that use of the Liver Dialysis Unit early in the disease 
process may avert respirator use, avoid or decrease days in the ICU, shorten length 
of stay, and obviate or postpone the need for transplant or improve the likelihood of 
successful transplant by stabilizing the patient’s health prior to surgery.

During treatment, a small amount of blood is drawn from the patient 
and passed across the dialyser membrane in the Liver Dialysis Unit. On 
the other side of the membrane, the sorbent suspension serves as a 
"sink" that draws toxins from the blood. The treated blood is then 
returned to the patient. 
Treatment is usually done for 2-5 consecutive days lasting 4-6 
hours.