Liver Transplantation
Prepared by
Assist prof Dr\ Afaf Mohamed

outline
• Definition
• Indications for liver transplantation
• Contraindications for liver transplantation
• Determination the candidates for liver transplantation
• Investigation before liver transplantation
• How does the waiting list work?
• Medical care of the patient A waiting a liver transplant

• Types of liver transplantation
• What happens when they find a match
• What happens during the transplant operation
• Indicators of post–Transplant liver functions
• Post-Operative Considerations
• Complications of liver transplantation

Definition:-
It is a partial or removal of the diseased 
liver and its replacement with a healthy liver 
in the same anatomic location. It is used to 
treat life threatening, end stage liver disease 
for which no other from of treatment is 
available.

Indications for liver transplantation:-
Liver transplantation is considered when the liver no longer functions 
adequately (liver failure). Some common causes of liver failure include:
❖ Sudden (acute) failure from infection or complications from certain 
medications 
❖ Long-term failure as a result of the following conditions:-
▪ Auto immune hepatitis. 
▪ Chronic hepatitis Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C (<5%)

Indications for liver transplantation:-
▪ Primary biliary cirrhosis. A rare condition where the immune system 
inappropriately attacks and destroys the bile ducts. 
• Sclerosing cholangitis. Scarring and narrowing (Harding and 
thickening) of the bile ducts inside and outside of the liver. This 
results in backup of bile in the liver and liver failure. 
• Biliary atresia. Malformation of the bile ducts. Common reason for 
transplant in children. 
• Alcoholism which cause laennec’s cirrhosis.

Indications for liver transplantation:-
• Wilson's disease. A rare inherited disease with abnormal deposition of copper 
throughout the body due to genetic mutation result in impaired hepatic excretion of 
copper including the liver, causing it to fail due to hepatitis and cirrhosis. 
• Hemochromatosis (iron overload disease). A common inherited disease where the body 
is overwhelmed with iron due to the alteration of absorption of iron from intestine. 
• Amyloidosis. The liver has abnormal deposits of an abnormal protein called amyloid 
that disrupts normal liver function 
• Liver cancer.
• Thrombosis which in hepatic vein and blocks hepatic venous out flow.

Contraindications for liver transplantation: 
• Sepsis. 
• Malignancies out side the liver. 
• Advanced hepatobiliary malignancy. 
• Active substance abuse. 
• Irreversible brain damage. 
• Inability to comply with post-transplant immunosuppression regimen. 
• AIDS. 
• Active cardio pulmonary disease.

Determination the candidates for liver transplantation:
This interdisciplinary healthcare team may include the following professionals:
• Liver specialist (hepatologist). 
• Transplant surgeons.
• Transplant coordinator, usually a registered nurse who specializes in the care of liver -transplant patients. This 
person will be primary contact with the transplant team
• Social worker to discuss your support network of family and friends, employment history, and financial needs. 
• Psychiatrist to help you deal with issues, such as anxiety and depression, which may accompany the liver 
transplantation. 
• Anesthesiologist to discuss potential anesthesia risks. 
• Chemical dependency specialist to aid those with history of alcohol or drug abuse. 
• Financial counselor to act as a liaison between a patient and his or her insurance companies.

Investigation before liver transplantation: 
• Computed tomography, which uses X -rays and a computer to generate pictures of the 
liver, showing its size and shape. 
• Doppler ultrasound to determine if the blood vessels to and from liver are open. 
• Echocardiogram to help evaluate heart. 
• Pulmonary function studies to determine lungs' ability to exchange oxygen and carbon 
dioxide. 
• Blood tests to determine blood type, clotting ability, and biochemical status of blood 
and to gauge liver function. AIDS testing and hepatitis screening are also included.

How does the waiting list work?
o If the person become an active liver -transplant candidate, his name will 
be placed on a waiting list.
o Patients are listed according to blood type, body size, and medical 
condition (how ill they are). 
o Each patient is given a priority score based on three simple blood tests 
(creatine, bilirubin, and INR). 
o The score is known as the MELD (model of end stage liver disease) score 
in adults and PELD (pediatric end stage liver disease) in children.  
Patients with the highest
o scores are transplanted first. As they become more ill, their scores will 
increase and therefore their priority for transplant increases, allowing for 
the sickest patients to be transplanted first. 
o A small group of patients who are critically ill from acute liver disease 
have the highest priority on the waiting list.
It is impossible to predict how long a patient will wait for a liver to become 
available

Medical care of the patient A waiting a liver transplant:
(A) Treatment of ascites
• Restriction of dietary sodium
• Diuretic therapy (spironolactone  and furasemide ).
• Paracentesis may be performed to remove ascitic fluid from the abdomen.
• A peritoneal venous shunt ( laveen shunt) may be surgically inserted which 
drams the abdominal cavity into a large central vein. This is not often used 
due to the significant risk of infection, DIC, or occlusion of the one way
valve used.
• TIPS shunt: - via an internal Jugular vein, the vena cava and the hepatic 
vein, a stent is placed within the liver parenchyma. This stent allows for 
decreased resistance to flow through  the livery connecting the pathway 
between  the portal vein and hepatic vein. This decreased portal pressure 
helps to prevent further variceal bleeding and accumulation further variceal 
bleeding and accumulation of ascites.

Medical care of the patient A waiting a liver transplant:
Treatment of variceal bleeding:
• Fluid resuscitation
• Correction of coagulopathies
• Sclerotherapy to control hemorrhage
• Esophageal – variceal ligation (banding)
• Sengstaken – Blakemore tube: - compression device which works by balloon 
tamponade.

Treatment of variceal bleeding:
• Vasopressin or octreotide therapy 
• TIPS.
• Distal splenorenal shunt (warren shunt): The  distal splenic vein is anastmosed with the 
left renal vein. Portal venous circulation is still preserved but decompression of the gastric 
and esophagal varacies occurs resulting in prevention of re bleeding.
• Partial mesocaval shunt: As mall (< 15 mm) Dacron graft is placed between the superior 
mesenteric vein and inferior vena cava. This results in partial diversion of portal blood 
flow a way from the liver

❖The donor, who may be a blood relative, spouse, or friend, will 
have extensive medical and psychological evaluations to ensure the 
lowest possible risk. Blood type and body size are critical factors in 
determining who is an appropriate donor.
❖Recipients for the living donor transplantation must be active on 
the transplant waiting list. Their health must also be stable enough 
to undergo transplantation with excellent chances of success.

What happens when they find a match?
When an organ has been identified a transplant coordinator will 
contact by telephone or by pager. Make sure that patient do not eat 
or drink anything once he have been called to the hospital. The 
transplant coordinator will notify of any additional instructions. 
When he arrive at the hospital, additional blood tests, an 
electrocardiogram, and a chest X -ray will generally be taken before 
the operation. Also may meet with the anesthesiologist and a 
surgical resident.

What happens during the transplant operation?
Liver transplants usually take from six hours to 12 hours. During the operation, surgeons 
will remove the liver and will replace it with the donor liver. Because a transplant operation 
is a major procedure, surgeons will need to place several tubes in body. These tubes are 
necessary to help body carry out certain functions during the operation and for a few days 
afterward:
During the operation, a tube will be placed through the mouth (endotracheal) to help 
breathe during the operation and for the first day or two following the operation. The tube is 
attached to a ventilator that will expand lungs mechanically.
A nasogastric tube will be inserted through the nose into the stomach. The N/G tube will 
drain secretions from stomach, and it will remain in place for a few days until the bowel 
function returns to normal.
A catheter will be placed in bladder to drain urine. This will be removed a few days after 
the operation.
Three tubes will be placed in abdomen to drain blood and fluid from around the liver. 
These will remain in place for about one week.
In most cases, the surgeon will place a special tube, called a T-tube, in bile duct. The T-tube 
will drain bile into a small pouch outside of your body so it can be measured several times 
daily.

What happens during the transplant operation?
Only certain transplant patients receive a T -tube, which remains in place for five months. 
The tube causes no discomfort and does not interfere with daily activities.
• The bile is flushed from gall bladder to prevent damage to the walls of the 
biliary tract.
• Liver is perfused with a preservative and cooled.
• Immediate before translation liver is flushed with cold lacated ringer’s solution 
to remove potassium and air bubbles.
• Anastomoses of the blood vessels and bile duct between the donor liver and the 
recipient’s liver.

What happens during the transplant operation?
• Biliary reconstruction is performed with an end to and 
anastomoses of the donor and recipient common bile ducts.
• Liver Transplantation is a long surgical procedure, because the 
patient with liver failure has portal hypertension and many venous 
collateral vessels that must be ligated.
• Blood loss may be extensive during surgery.
• If shunt is performed: - should reverse to permit adequate portal 
venous blood supply to the new liver.

Indicators of post–Transplant liver functions
Neurological status:-
If the patient was encephalopathic pro -operative, should observe mental clearing as 
ammonia levels and cerebral edema decrease.
PT / PTI:-
The patient may have been coagulopathic pre-operative but these lab values should trend 
towards normal with out intervention if the liver is producing clothing factors.
Liver function tests:-
Albumin, AST, ALT, GGT, LDH, Alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, and NH3 all 
begin trending toward normal if the grafted liver is functioning well.

Indicators of post–Transplant liver functions
Bile production:-
The newly grafted liver should begin to produce bile immediately. Thick, 
dark, golden-brown / green bile is an indicator of good liver function.
Lactate:-
Patients with pre -operative fulminant hepatic failure/necrosis should have 
lactate levels that trend towards normal after transplantation providing their 
fluid status is adequate. Elevated lactate levels also are seen in hypoperfusion 
states, late sepsis or primary non function.

Post-Operative Considerations:-
A. Hemodynamics:-
(1)Vasodilation: followed by hypotension may occur during the warming phase of 
hypothermia. 
Hypovolemia: may be experienced by the patient due to third spacing of fluids, 
hemorrhage, sepsis, low oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia, or complement 
(1)activation after liver graft reperfusion. This may be treated with volume expanders 
such as crystalloids NS= 0.9% (NaCl), albumin, or other blood products. 
(2)Hypertension: may be due to physiologic stress, shivering, anxiety, pain, 
hypothermia, tacrolimus or cyclosporine therapy, or fluid overload in patients with 
renal failure. post-operative hypertension may be treated with a Nipride drip.

Post-Operative Considerations:-
Renal Status:-
Patients who experience renal insufficiency/ failure pre -operative in 
conjunction with ESLD have what is known as hepatorenal syndrome. Risk 
factors for continued post-op renal problems
1. Nephrotoxic drugs: Cyclosporine, Tacro, Abelcet, aminoglycosides 
2. Intra /post-operative instability coupled with hypoperfusion.
3. Recurring hepatorenal syndrome related to primary nonfunction or 
acute liver failure.

Post-Operative Considerations:-
C. Laboratory Values:-
Hyponatremia: Remobilization of free water. 
Tx: be corrected slowly with fluid restriction.
Hypernatremia: Occurs with dehydration, diuretics, salt -
rich solutions (albumin). 
Tx: Rehydrate, decreased/discontinue diuretics, mix albumin 
in D5W instead of the usual NS.

Hypokalemia: Seen with diuretic usage, metabolic alkalosis, insulin 
drip therapy, steroid therapy, hypothermia, 
Tx: potassium supplements.
Hyperkalemia: Occur as result of renal failure, primary non function 
of Graft (PNFG), multiple blood transfusions, or as a side effect of 
Tacro or Cyclosporine. 
Tx: If acutely high, may require insulin / glucose regimen, Kay oxlate, 
or dialysis.

Post-Operative Considerations:-
Hypomagnesemia: Related to hypocalcemia, Cyclosporine/Tacro side effects.
Tx:  Magnesium supplements. 
Hypocalcemia: May be the result of massive blood transfusions. 
Tx: Calcium supplements.
Hypophosphotemia: Weakens respiratory muscles, adversely effecting ventilator 
weaning. Causes neuromuscular irritability and contributes to platelet dysfunction. 
Tx: phosphate supplements.

Post-Operative Considerations:-
Hyperphosphotemia: Related to renal failure. 
Tx: Phosphate binders (CaCO3), or dialysis
Hypoglycemia: Recurrent acute liver failure. 
Tx: Dextrose IV may be necessary based on blood glucose levels.
Hyperglycemia: Post-operative  is considered a good sign of glycogen 
storage and gluconeogenesis by the grafted liver. May also result from 
steroid therapy or sepsis later in the post-operative phase. 
Tx: Insulin drip per protocol or sliding scale.
1. PT/INR: May be grossly elevated post -operative. Should begin to 
normalize. Not treated unless patient actively bleeding/ invasive 
procedure will be performed /MD discretion.
2. PTT: May be grossly elevated post -operative should begin to 
normalize. Not treated unless patient actively bleeding/invasive 
procedures will be performed. 
3. Hct: Monitor for post-operative bleeding. 
1. WBC:May be affected by steroids and other immunosuppressants, 
and infection. Monitor for abnormal values.
Platelets: Will be treated for <20.000 if patient is activity bleeding

Complications of liver transplantation:-
Two of the most common complications following liver transplantation are rejection and infection.
Rejection:-
Immune system works to destroy foreign substances that invade body. The immune system, however, 
cannot distinguish between transplanted liver and unwanted invaders, such as viruses and bacteria. Therefore, your 
immune system attempts to attack and destroy new liver. 
• Types of rejection:-
There are 4 types of rejection that can occur
Hyper acute rejection:-
Occurs minutes to hours after transplantation secondary to presensitization (Action of B -cells) this process Acute and rare. Total 
hepatic failure results and immediate retrains plantation is required.
Accelerated  or sub acute rejection:-
Occurs with in 2 -4 days post operation secondary to (Action of T -cells) it is recognized by fever, jaundice, decreasing quality and 
quantity of bile, malaise, clay- pain.

Types of rejection:-
Acute rejection:-
Occurs in 7 days to several weeks post operative. Secondary to T -cell action, 
with the same symptoms as accelerated rejection.
Chronic rejection:-
Occurs months to years post -operative due to action  of a combination of T -
cells and B-level of ALK. phos, GGT, AST, ALT, and bilirubin are seen.

Complications of liver transplantation:-
Infection:-
Because antirejection drugs that suppress immune system are needed to 
prevent the liver from being rejected, are at increased risk for infections. 
This problem diminishes as time passes. Not all patients have problems with 
infections, and most infections can be treated successfully as they occur.