Myasthenia Gravis
Prepared by 
Dr /Ghada Elsayed

Outlines
• Definition of Myasthenia Gravis 
• Causes of Myasthenia Gravis 
• Pathophysiology
• Clinical manifestations of Myasthenia Gravis 
• Diagnostic tests of Myasthenia Gravis 
• Medical treatment of Myasthenia Gravis
• Nursing management of Myasthenia Gravis

Pre test 
Mention causes 
of myasthenia 
gravis 
Mention 3 clinical 
manifestation of 
MG

Definition;
Produces sporadic but progressive weakness 
and abnormal fatigue in striated (skeletal) 
muscles. 
This weakness and fatigue are exacerbated by 
exercise and repeated movement but 
improved by anticholinesterase drugs. 
Usually, myasthenia gravis affects muscles 
innervated by the cranial nerves (face, lips, 
tongue, neck, and throat), but it can affect any 
muscle group.

Couses of the 
disease
Myasthenia gravis has an unpredictable course that 
includes
periods of exacerbation and remission.
Drug treatment has improved the prognosis and allows 
patients to lead relatively normal lives, except during 
exacerbations.
However, if the disease involves the respiratory system, 
it can be life-threatening 
The cause of myasthenia gravis isn’t known; however, it 
commonly accompanies autoimmune and thyroid 
disorders.

Pathophysiology
The patient‘s blood cells and thymus gland produce 
antibodies that block, destroy, or weaken the 
neuroreceptors that transmit nerve impulses, causing a 
failure in transmission of nerve impulses at the 
neuromuscular junction.
In myasthenia gravis, antibodies attach to the ACh 
receptor sites. 
They block, destroy, and weaken these sites, leaving them 
insensitive to ACh, thereby blocking neuromuscular 
transmission.

Clinical 
manifestations
Common signs of myasthenia gravis include:
according to affected nerve 
1. Gradual, progressive skeletal muscle weakness and fatigue 
that worsens during the day
2. Weak eye closure, ptosis, and diplopia 
3. Blank, masklike facial expression
4. Difficulty chewing and swallowing 
6. lateral motion of the head 
7. Symptoms of respiratory failure if respiratory muscles are 
involved.

Diagnostic tests
The Tensilon test confirms the diagnosis by 
temporarily improving muscle function after 
an I. V . injection of neostigmine.
Long-standing ocular muscle dysfunction, 
however, may not respond.
Electromyography helps differentiate nerve 
disorders from muscle disorders.
Nerve conduction studies test for receptor 
antibodies.

Medical 
treatment
Treatment is 
symptomatic. 
• 1. Anticholinesterase drugs 
• 2. Corticosteroids may help to 
relieve symptoms. 
• 3.Plasmapheresis. 
• 4. One with thymomas requires 
thymectomy, which may lead to 
remission in adult-onset 
myasthenia gravis.

In crises Acute exacerbations that cause severe respiratory distress 
necessitate emergency treatment.
Tracheotomy, o positive-pressure ventilation, o vigorous suctioning to 
remove secretions usually yield improvement in a matter of days. 
Anticholinesterase drugs aren’t effective during myasthenic crisis, so 
they‘re discontinued until respiratory function begins to improve.

Nursing 
management; 
• Establish an accurate neurologic and respiratory 
baseline
• Help remove secretions as they accumulate
• Be alert for signs of an impending crisis (increased 
muscle weakness, respiratory distress, and difficulty 
talking or chewing)
• For the best results, administer drugs at evenly spaced 
intervals and on time, as ordered. 
• Be prepared to give atropine for anticholinesterase 
overdose or toxicity.

• Plan periods of exercise, meals, patient care, and daily 
activities to take advantage of peaks in the patient‘s 
energy level.
• Provide soft, solid foods instead of liquids to reduce the 
risk of choking. 
• Always sit the patient up to eat.
• Encourage the patient to take an active role in deciding 
about his care.
• Evaluate the patient. 
• Look for normal vital signs, evidence of adequate 
hydration and normal elimination, skin that‘s free from 
sores or problems, and an optimal capacity for activity.

Myasthenia gravis teaching tips 
1. Help the patient plan daily activities to coincide with energy peaks.
Stress the need for frequent rest periods throughout the day.
Emphasize that periodic remissions, exacerbations, and day-to-day fluctuate ons are common. 
2. Teach the patient how to recognize adverse effects and signs of toxicity of anticholinesterase drugs (headaches, weakness,
sweating, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive salivation, bronchospasm) and corticosteroids. 
Warn him to avoid strenuous exercise, stress, infection, and unnecessary exposure to the sun or cold weather.
Caution him to avoid taking other medications without consulting his primary health care provider

Post test 
Mention causes 
of mythenia 
gravis 
Mention3 
symptoms of 
MG