Prepared by: Assist professor 
Dr :Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outline
Introduction 
Definition of Malnutrition in critically-ill patients
General goals of nutritional support
Methods Of Nutritional Support
1. Enteral nutrition
2. Parenteral nutrition
Nursing Role In Nutritional Care of Critically ill Patients

Introduction
Nutrition is recognized as a vital component of health so 
that an optimum nutritional status helps maintain health, 
promotes normal growth and development, regulates body 
process and protects the body against diseases.
Critically ill patients are hypermetabolic and have 
increased nutrient requirements. So that Nutritional support 
has become a routine part of the care of critically ill patients

Definition malnutrition in critically-ill patients: 
Refers to a generalized disordering 
of body composition such that either 
macro- or micro - nutrient intake is sub -
optimal. Severe deficits can result in 
organ dysfunction , abnormalities in 
blood biochemistry and reduced body 
mass.

Causes of malnutrition in A critically ill patient 
❑ Exposed to stress are lead to  more damaging because protein becomes more significant energy substrate. 
stress in form  as
- Sepsis                                                                                  - Major burn, 
- Multiple organ system failure                                           - Traumatic injury, surgery
- Respiratory compromise.
❑ Other cause 
- Limited nutrient intake                                                                  - limited absorption,
- Increased caloric losses,                                                               - Increased nutrient requirement
- Increased catabolic state are often associated with acute severe illness and frequent presence of prior 
chronic wasting condition.

Causes of malnutrition in A critically ill patient 
❖ Contributing factors affecting absorption in the critically ill that 
include: intestinal villous atrophy which results in a reduction in the 
surface area available for absorption; digestive enzyme deficiency related 
to malnutrition.
❖ Increased losses are another factor which may contribute to malnutrition 
in the critically ill patient. Diarrhea is considered the most important 
cause for increasing loss in ICU patient.

The Causes of diarrhea are: 
➢ Prolonged bowel rest and its subsequent gut atrophy, 
➢ Lack of fiber in many feeding product can contribute to 
diarrhea as fiber normalizes stool pattern and provides a 
source of short chain fatty acids that aiding in the 
prevention of diarrhea, Also Deficiencies in vitamin A 
can contribute to the development of diarrhea. 
➢ Also hypertonic tube feeding is often implicated as a 
cause of diarrhea and both the osmolality of the enteral 
product.

The Causes of diarrhea are: 
➢ Hypoalbuminemia can contribute to the development of diarrhea in 
critically ill. Colloid osmotic pressure decreases with 
Hypoalbuminemia and results in mucosal edema and impaired 
absorption. Albumin level of less than 2.5 g/dl has been reported to 
increase the likelihood of diarrhea.
❖ Stress ulcer related GI bleeding is another serious complication 
which increases morbidity and mortality in ICU. H 2 (histamine) 
antagonists and antacids are still prescribed to reduce stress ulceration 
and bleeding. The buffering of hydrochloric acid reduces the 
bacteriostatic capabilities of the stomach.

General goals of nutritional support: 
• To provide patients with their general nutrient requirements
❖Nutrient requirements depend on 
✓Individual patient needs 
✓Specific disease processes
The Harris-Benedict equation can be used or even more simply, 
requirements can be guessed  25 total kilocalories /kg/day is the 
estimate most often used.

Calories can be given in three forms: 
Carbohydrate: 30 to 70% of the total calories can be given 
as carbohydrate. 
Fat: 20 to 50% of the total calories can be given as fat. 
Protein: 15 to 20% of the total calories per day can be 
administered as protein or amino acids depending on route 
of administration.
• Micronutrient Approximately 1mmol/kg of both sodium and 
potassium
• Other electrolytes, e.g. magnesium, iron, copper, zinc and 
selenium are also necessary, but in much smaller amounts. 
• Other micronutrients include 
✓fat soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E , K and  carotene) 
✓water-soluble vitamins (B, C,).

Fluid requirements
• Factors are affected Fluid needsby 
➢Functional cardiac
➢Pulmonary
➢Hepatic
➢Renal status
Fluid requirements increase with 
➢fever
➢Diarrhea
➢Hemorrhage
➢Surgical drains
➢Loss of skin integrity (ie, burns, open wounds).
➢ Whereas patients with cardiac, pulmonary or renal disease may require less fluid intake.
➢ The average adult requires approximately 35-45 ml/kg of water per day,

Fluid needs are determined by careful monitoring, particularly: 
Patient's physical appearance 
Dry mucous membranes with volume depletion - Edema with volume excess 
• Serum sodium concentrations 
o Hyponatremia may occur in the presence of excess, normal or depleted fluid volume. 
o Hypernatremia may result from pure water loss, pure salt gain or hypotonic fluid loss. 
• BUN : Creatinine ratio 
o Normal BUN : SrCr ratio is 10:1 to 15:1. - Renal failure or abnormalities in fluid volume may 
alter this ratio. 
• Intake and output 
o Urine output            -  Other fluid losses (vomiting, diarrhea, skin losses and fistula drainages)

Methods Of Nutritional Support:
❑Enteral Nutrition
❑Parenteral Nutrition

Enteral Nutrition
defined, as nutrition via the gastro-
intestinal (GI) tract but generally is 
interpreted as nutrition via tube 
feeding into GI tract through
-Orogastric                       -Nasogastric
-Esophagostomy         -Pharyngotomy
-Gastrostomy        -Jejunostomy tubes.

The rational for prescribing enteral nutrition rather than parenteral 
nutrition is based on the following: 
(1) Maintenance of gut structure and function 
(2) Enhanced use of nutrients 
(3) Safety of administration 
 (4) Reduced cost.
(5)Enteral nutrition is considered safer than parenteral nutrition when it is 
administered carefully

Indication enteral nutrition
• Functional GI tracts who are unable to consume adequate amounts of energy (Kcals) and or nutrients 
by mouth.
• Protein-calorie malnutrition with inadequate oral intake for the previous 5 days, normal nutritional 
status with less than 50% of required oral intake for the previous 7-10 days, 
• Severe dysphagia
• Major full-thickness burn, 
• Massive small-bowel resection in combination with administration of total parental nutrition. 
• Major trauma,
• Radiation therapy, mild chemotherapy 
• Liver or kidney failure.

Enteral    formulas   can   be   categorized   as   
❖Polymeric formula
❖Monomeric formulas
❖Disease specific formula 
❖ The diseases-specific formulas  have been formulated to meet the needs of patients with special disease -
related needs. These include renal, hepatic, pulmonary, cardiac, trauma and stress and clear liquid formulas

Nutrients in polymeric formulas
➢ Polymeric formulas range from those made from 
blenderized foods to those compounded from protein 
isolates (e.g., caseinate & soy), vegetable oils and 
carbohydrates. Lactose has been eliminated as a 
carbohydrate source from most compounded formulas 
because patients with primary lactase deficiency do not 
tolerate it. 
➢ Since secondary lactose deficiency may result from 
critical illness, the critically ill patient is also unlikely to 
tolerate lactose.

polymeric formulas
➢ The caloric density of most of these formulas is 1 Kcal 
per milliliter, although some provide 1.5 or 2 Kcal per 
milliliter. 
➢ The higher -calorie formulas are useful in meeting 
elevated energy requirements of the critically ill patient.
➢ Nurses should observe the patient for tolerance of 
formula as evidenced by absence of abdominal 
distension, nausea, vomiting or diarrhea.

Monomeric formulas
➢  Provide nutrients in simple or "predigested" form and very little 
digestion is required before nutrients can be absorbed. 
➢ These formulas are compounded from nutrient sources ranging from 
simple crystalline amino acids and glucose molecules, to slightly 
more complex sources such as di- and tripeptides and modified corn 
starch or glucose oligosaccharides.
➢ Most monomeric formulas are powder and require reconstitution. 
➢ Caloric density depends upon final dilution, but all full strength 
they provide 1 Kcal per milliliter .
.

Complications enteral nutrition 
1- Gastrointestinal complications include :  nausea, vomiting ,  diarrhea  incidence rate ranges from 2.3% to 
63% and     constipation. 
Nausea, vomiting, or gastroparesis can be caused by 
o Medications                                                         Critical illness
o Rapid or bolus infusion                                       
o Diabetes                                                           Neurologic dysfunction
o Improper tube placement.                                      GI infection
o GI dysfunction (hypermotility or malabsorption), and hyperosmolar or low residue formula
Constipation caused by  lack of adequate hydration, long -term fiber -free feedings, bed rest, impaction, 
obstruction, and narcotics .

2- Metabolic complications
. Dehydration due to inadequate fluid intake or excessive fluid losses through diarrhea, 
diuresis, wounds, or fever. 
• Overhydration during enteral feeding is possible when metabolic demands arc high and 
organ function (Cardiac, renal, or hepatic) is impaired.
▪ Hyperglycemia can occur with enteral nutrition. It is most common in patients with
Diabetes, Metabolic stress , Sepsis or with the use of steroids or excessive glucose 
administration 
• Electrolyte and mineral abnormalities

3- Pulmonary complications
Pulmonary aspiration are potentially the most dangerous complications 
associated with enteral feedings and may even result in death . 
Pulmonary aspiration manifested with 
o Fever 
o Tachypnea
o Tachycardia
o Hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, and/or new pulmonary infiltrate become evident on X -ray 
without any other obvious cause.

4-Tube   occlusion
Causes of tube occlusion 
❑ Inadequate tube flushing,
❑ Administration of medication through the tube. 
The researches added pill fragments formula residue adhering to 
the tube lumen.

5- Mechanical   complication
Can   be   divided   into   two   types   of complications, 
❖ First type occurs during tube insertion
❖ Second type occurs during blind insertion of small bore feeding tubes with rigid stylist is relatively 
common problem. These tubes must be inserted with caution and without undue force.
Prevent enteral nutrition  complication 
➢ Close monitoring , timely and accurate assessment of a patient's tolerance to feeding. 
➢ The clinical nurse plays a vital role in providing these observations and can assist easily in complication 
prevention. 
➢ Clinical pathways are useful tools that allow the clinicians to track patient outcomes related to enteral 
therapy and to document variances as they occur.

Parenteral Nutrition
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), or delivery 
of all nutrients by intravenous infusion, is 
usually recommended when oral or tube 
feedings are expected in be contraindicated 
or inadequate for more than 5 to 7 days.

Parenteral Nutrition
TPN is most commonly used for one of two reasons:
1. The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is unable to digest or 
absorb adequate nutrients. Examples include 
intractable vomiting, severe diarrhea, prematurely, 
some cases of abdominal trauma, prolonged ileus, and 
massive small bowel resection.
2. There is a need for bowel rest . Examples include 
enteral fistulae and acute inflammatory bowel disease 
that does not respond to other therapies. 
enteral fistulae

TPN is contraindicated 
• When the gastrointestinal tract is functional.
• Feeding with TPN alone is associated with atrophy of the intestinal villi 
and impaired absorption when feedings are resumed
• The intestinal mucosa's ability to act as a barrier to microorganisms is 
impaired
• Animal studies there is increased risk of translocating or movement of 
bacteria through the intestinal wall into the bloodstream and to other 
organs. When the patient can tolerate them, small amounts of food help to 
prevent villous atrophy.

Routes for parenteral Nutrition:
There are several possible mutes for TPN delivery:
1) Peripheral Venous Catheters
These catheters are usually inserted in the upper extremities. 
Advantages: few 
Disadvantages
❑Requires good peripheral venous access, 
❑Limits its long term use>
❑Not usually useful for home TPN.
❑Difficult to deliver adequate kcal to stressed individuals or those with high kcal needs because peripheral veins do not 
tolerate solution concentration >900 mOsm/kg .
❑Limits dextrose concentrations to about 10%.

Routes for parenteral Nutrition:
Central Venous Catheters
         Central venous catheters (CVCs) are usually inserted into the superior or inferior 
vena cava via the subclavian, internal or external jugular, or femoral veins.
Advantages
✓  Allow use of extremely hypertonic solutions (>1800 mOsm/kg) 
✓ Appropriate for long term and home use.
✓  long-term catheters are not easily dislodged because their proximal ends are tunneled 
under the skin and have cuffs that adhere to the subcutaneous tissues.
✓ Multi lumen CVC catheters reduce the risk of drug incompatibilities when more than 
one medication is given at once and allow for blood sampling via the CVC.
Disadvantages
 Complications include pneumothorax, air embolism, central vein thrombosis, catheter -
related sepsis, and catheter mobilization

Routes for parenteral Nutrition:
Subcutaneous Infusion Ports
            The subcutaneous infusion port is an implanted reservoir with a 
catheter attached. Before each infusion, a noncoring needle is inserted 
through the skin and into the septum on the port.
Advantages
Useful for intermittent therapy (e.g., chemotherapy, selected patients 
needing intermittent TPN); require no flushing or site care when not in use; 
lower infection rates than standard catheters in several studies. 
Disadvantages
Requires a needle to access the port; risk of extravasation of infusale if 
the needle slips out of the port.

Administration regimens and formula:
➢Daily requirements are estimated according to body weight, and to which are added the 
deficit. 
➢Daily readjustment depends upon monitoring of fluid, electrolyte, and nutritional 
status.
➢ Carbohydrates are provided mainly by glucose, to provide enough energy without 
overloading the circulation, high concentrations are used, e.g., 20% or 50% glucose. 
➢Proteins are commonly administered as L-amino acids solutions that should contain the 
essential members. Examples of the commercially available preparations are Vamin, 
Freamine, and Novoplex. 
➢These solutions also contain sodium, potassium, phosphate, magnesium, vitamins, 
trace elements, and glucose in amounts that vary from one product to the other.

Administration regimens and formula:
➢ Fat emulsions are produced from Soya oil, and are available in 10% and 
20% concentrations, both are isotonic and can be given via a peripheral 
vein. 
➢ Fat emulsions are good source of energy because liter of the 20% 
preparation provides 2000Kcal. 
➢ They are usually given twice weekly to provide essential fatty acids. 
➢ When mainly using an amino acid/carbohydrate solution, it should be 
administered in gradually increasing  doses over 3-4 days. 
➢ This allows for the development of tolerance.

Preventing and Correcting Complications of Parenteral Nutrition
Complication Sings/symptoms Prevention/ intervention
Catheter-related sepsis ❑ Fever 
❑ Chills
❑ Glucose intolerance
❑ Positive blood culture; bacterial 
colony counts in blood 
aspirated from the catheter 5-10 
times higher than in blood 
obtained from a peripheral site
▪ Maintain an intact dressing.
▪ Use aseptic technique whenever 
handling catheter.
▪ Hang a single bottle of TPN no 
longer than 24 hr, lipid 
emulsion no longer than 12 hr; 
▪ Salvage of infected catheters 
has been attempted with an 
"antibiotic lock" by placing a 
concentrated antibiotic solution 
in the catheter for 12 hr.

Preventing and Correcting Complications of Parenteral Nutrition
Complication Sings/symptoms Prevention/ intervention
Air embolism Dyspnea, cyanosis, tachycardia, 
hypotension, possibly death
o Use Luer -lok system or secure all 
connections all. 
o Groshong catheter, which has valve 
at tip, may reduce risk of air 
embolism; 
o Use an inline 0.22 µm air -
eliminating filter if solutions don't 
contain lipids or 1.2 µm or larger if 
solutions contain lipids; 
o Have patient perform Valsalva's 
maneuver during tubing changes;
o If air embolism is suggested, place 
patient in left lateral decubitus 
position and administer oxygen; 
immediately notify physician, who 
will attempt to aspirate air from the 
heart

Preventing and Correcting Complications of Parenteral Nutrition
Complication Sings/symptoms Prevention/ intervention
Central venous thrombosis Unilateral edema of neck, shoulder, 
and arm; development of collateral 
circulation on chest; pain in 
insertion site
• Follow measures to prevent 
sepsis; repeated or traumatic 
catheterizations are most likely 
to result in thrombosis;
•  Treatment usually includes 
anticoagulation; if symptoms 
are not too severe, the catheter 
might be left in place; 
• if symptoms are severe, 
thrombolytic therapy and/or 
catheter removal may be 
necessary.

Preventing and Correcting Complications of Parenteral Nutrition
Complication Sings/symptoms Prevention/ intervention
Catheter occlusion or 
semiocclusion
No flow or sluggish flow through 
the catheter; or infusion through the 
catheter possible, but blood cannot 
be aspirated from the catheter
• Flush catheter with heparinized 
saline if infusion is stopped 
temporarily;
•  if catheter appears to be 
occluded, attempt to aspirate the 
clot;
• Thrombolytic agent may restore 
patency if clotted or occluded 
by fibrin sheath; hydrochloric 
acid, 0.1 N, 
• Has been used to clear drug 
precipitates and 70% ethanol to 
clear lipid precipitates.

Preventing and Correcting Complications of Parenteral Nutrition
Complication Sings/symptoms Prevention/ intervention
Hypoglycemia Diaphoresis, shakiness, 
confusion, loss of 
consciousness
• Do not discontinue TPN 
abruptly, taper rate over 
several hours; 
• use pump to regulate 
infusion so that it remains 
±10% of ordered rate; 
• if hypoglycemia if 
suggested, then administer 
oral carbohydrate; 
• if oral intake is 
contraindicated or patient 
is unconscious, a bolus of 
IV dextrose may be used.