Thyroid Crisis
Prepared by: Assist professor 
Dr :Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outlines
❖ Description
❖ Etiology
❖ Pathophysiology
❖ Clinical Manifestations
❖ Assessment and Diagnosis
❖ Medical Management
❖ Pharmacologic Management
❖ Nursing Intervention

The patients with thyroid storm or crisis
is critically ill and requires astute
observation , aggressive and supportive
nursing care during and after the acute
stage of illness. but with proper treatment
the mortality rate is reduced
substantially.
Introduction

The thyroid is is a small, butterfly-shaped endocrine gland in the front of 
the neck, below the larynx and anterior to the trachea. 
❑Two iodine-dependent hormones: 
❖Thyroxine (T4) 
❖Triiodothyronine (T3)
❑A third hormone known as thyrocalcitonin (calcitonin) is produced by 
the C cells of the thyroid gland in response to calcium levels. The C cell 
makes calcitonin. that helps to regulate calcium levels in the blood. 
Thyroid gland
The thyroid gland produces

Function of thyroid gland 
➢Regulating the metabolic 
processes controlling the rate 
of growth
➢Oxygen consumption
➢Contractility of the heart
➢Calcium absorption
These hormones play a role in

Thyroid Crisis
• Thyroid storm (thyrotoxic crisis) is a form 
of severe hyperthyroidism, usually of 
abrupt onset. Untreated it is almost always 
fatal

➢ Over half the causes of primary hyperthyroidism are due to Graves disease, an 
autoimmune condition.
➢ Graves disease is caused by circulating immunoglobulin-G (IgG) antibodies that attack 
the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor cells on the gland' causing release of 
thyroid hormone.
➢ The antidysrhythmic medication amiodarone causes thyroid dysfunction in 10% to 20% 
of amiodarone-treated patients.
➢ Stopping antithyroid medications 
➢ Major stressors, such as infection, surgery, trauma, pregnancy, or critical illness, can 
precipitate thyroid storm in any patient with pre-existing hyperthyroidism.
Etiology

Etiology
❑ In thyroid storm, excessive endogenous thyroid hormone
▪ Increases metabolic activity 
▪ Stimulates the beta-adrenergic receptors resulting in a 
heightened SNS response. There is hyperactivity of cardiac 
tissue, nervous tissue, and smooth muscle tissue and 
tremendous heat production

Clinical Manifestations
I. Cardiovascular System Prompted by Increased Affinity of Beta- 
Adrenergic Receptors in the Heart.
• Tachycardia                                                                         systolic murmur .
• Increase stroke volume                                                     Increased cardiac output
• Increased systolic blood pressure                                  Decreased diastolic blood pressure
• Extra systoles                                                             Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
▪ Premature ventricular contraction                                                  Palpitations
▪ Chest pain                                                                               Increased cardiac contractility
▪ Acute heart failure                                                               Pulmonary edema.
▪ Cardiogenic shock

2- Central Nervous System Resulting from an Increased 
Catecholamine Response
• Hyperkinesis                                                                                        Nervousness
• Muscle weakness                                                                                     Confusion
• Convulsions                                                                                               Heat intolerance
• Fine tremor                                                                                                Emotional lability
• Frank psychosis                                                                                         Apathy
▪ Diaphoresis

Gastrointestinal System
• Nausea .
• Vomiting
• Diarrhea
• Liver enlargement
• Abdominal pain
• Weight loss

I. integumentary System
• Pruritus
• Hyperpigmentation of skin
• Fine, straight hair
• Alopecia.
V-Thermoregulatory System
• Hyperthermia
•Heat dissipation
• Diaphoresis
Alopecia.

Serum or Urine
• Hypercalcemia
•  Hyperglycemia
• Hypoalbuminemia
• Hypoprothrombinemia
• Hypocholesterolemia
• Creatinuria

Assessment and Diagnosis
The clinical presentation of thyroid storm is 
characterized by a variety of organ systems 
including:
1- Thermoregulation: fever
2. Heart: atrial fibrillation, supraventricular 
tachycardia, acute heart failure
3. Central nervous system: agitation, restlessness, 
delirium
4. Gastrointestinal: nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, unexplained jaundice, stupor, coma

Medical Management
▪ The goal of acute medical management of thyroid storm is 
✓ To reduce the clinical effects of thyroid hormone as rapidly as possible.
✓ Preventing cardiac decompensation, 
✓ Reducing hyperthermia, 
✓ Reversing dehydration caused by fever or gastrointestinal 
losses.

Medical Management
Prevent Cardiovascular Collapse
▪ Atrial dysrhythmias need to be controlled and progression of heart failure 
halted. Beta-blockers are the mainstay of therapy for cardiac protection.
Reduce Hyperthermia
▪ Use of a cooling blanket 
▪ Antipyretic agent acetaminophen. 
▪ Salicylates (aspirin) are contraindicated because they inhibit protein binding of 
T3 to T4, increasing the level of free, metabolically active, thyroid hormone.

Medical Management
Reverse Dehydration
▪ Dehydration is treated with large 
volumes of glucose and isotonic 
sodium solutions to replace 
circulating fluid and sodium 
losses from hypermetabolism.
▪ Antibiotic therapy may be 
warranted in the presence of 
systemic infection.

Pharmacologic Management
▪ Beta-blockers are administered to decrease the peripheral 
cellular sensitivity to catecholamines 
▪ Antithyroid medications are administered to block the 
synthesis and release of thyroid hormone into the circulation

Pharmacologic Management
1- Block the Catecholamine Effect
To decrease the catecholamine effects of excessive thyroid hormone, beta-
adrenergic blocking agents are used.
▪ Propranolol is the most frequently used medication
-Beta-blockers have no effect on thyroid hormone but reduce the 
exaggerated myocardial stimulation and slow the atrioventricular (AV) 
conduction rate.

Pharmacologic Management
2-druge Block Thyroid Synthesis
The synthesis of new thyroid hormone is blocked by the administration of 
antithyroid medications.
▪ Two agents are frequently used: Propylthiouracil (PTU) and ‘Methimazole.
▪ These medications are administered by mouth or via a feeding tube PTU is 
especially therapeutic because it blocks thyroid synthesis 
▪ Both medications act within 1 to 2 hours after absorption from the 
gastrointestinal tract.

Pharmacologic Management
3-Block Release of Thyroid Hormone
▪ Administration of inorganic iodine blocks the release of any preformed 
thyroxine that is already in the thyroid gland but not yet released. 
▪ It is essential that iodine therapy not be administered until adequate 
inhibition of new hormone synthesis has occurred
▪ The iodide preparations are rapid acting and have a short duration. They 
are given approximately 1 hour after administration of the 
antithyroid medications.

Pharmacologic Management
Some patients with thyroid storm have concomitant adrenal 
insufficiency and may be prescribed hydrocortisone or dexa-
methasone during the initial stages of thyroid storm 
management.

Nursing interventions;
Nursing interventions are directed toward 
❑ Safe administration and monitoring of the effects of prescribed 
medications
❑ Normalizing body temperature
❑ Rehydration with correction of other metabolic derangements and 
provision of patient education.

Medication Administration
▪ The timely and ordered sequence of medication administration is essential in 
the management of thyroid storm
▪ The patient in thyroid storm is agitated, anxious, and unable to rest and 
benefits from an environment that is calm. 
▪ Heart rate should decrease with beta-blockade.
▪ The patient and family need to be reassured that this extreme agitation is the 
result of the disease process and that the medications will help control the 
nonstop fidgeting and tremors.
▪ Frequent reassurance and clear, simple explanations of the patient's 
condition help decrease the fear brought on by the onset of thyroid storm

Normalize Body Temperature
▪ In thyroid storm, the patient has hyperthermia related to a hypermetabolic 
state, as evidenced by a critically high body temperature; diaphoresis; hot, 
flushed skin; intolerance to heat tachycardia; and tachypnea.
▪ Temperature is assessed frequently until normal body temperature is 
attained. 
▪ Nursing measures to provide comfort while the patient is intolerant to heat 
include a room with a cool environment and a fan to circulate air, and 
comfortable, nonrestrictive bedclothes.

▪ A tepid sponge bath helps to reduce 
heat by evaporation, and cold-pack 
applications to the groin and axilla 
increase heat loss at major blood 
vessels.
▪ If antipyretic medications are 
required, acetaminophen is the~ 
agent of choicen
Normalize Body Temperature

Rehydration and Correction of Metabolic Derangements
▪ Hyperthermia, tachypnea, diaphoresis, vomiting, and diarrhea predispose the 
patient to a fluid volume deficit. Fluids and electrolytes are as vigorously 
replaced as the decompensated cardiovascular system can tolerate.
▪ Glucose solutions are given to replace glycogen stores, which are depleted. 
Insulin is administered to treat the hyperglycemia that results from 
mobilization of nutrients and glucocorticoids.
▪ Hyponatremia from active loss (e.g., vomiting) is monitored by means of 
laboratory serum values. Hyponatremia can be prevented or treated with 
isotonic IV fluid replacement

Patient Education
▪ During the critical events surrounding the thyroid storm, 
the patient and family are given information according to 
their emotional state and cognitive level of understanding.
▪ The cause of the high fever, anxiety, and cardiac 
dysrhythmias is explained in understandable terms
▪ Side effects of the specific medication therapy are taught 
before discharge

Patient Education
▪ Patients treated with beta-blockers are taught to report signs' of 
bradycardia, unexplained fatigue, and orthostatic hypotension, among 
other untoward effects.
▪ Patients discharged with antithyroid medications are alerted to the 
potential side effect, agranulocytosis.
▪ Symptoms of agranulocytosis include sudden cough, fever, rash, and 
inflammation.
▪ For management or elevated temperature, patients are instructed to use 
acetaminophen rather than salicylates, because salicylates increase the 
amount of free thyroid hormone in circulation.

MCQ
Which of the following findings would most likely indicate the client is experiencing 
a thyroid storm?
A. Bradycardia and hypotension
B. Hyperpyrexia and extreme tachycardia
C. Numbness and tingling in the fingers
D. Lethargy and cold intolerance
What is the expected outcome of an untreated thyroid storm?
A.  Spontaneous recovery 
B.  Progression to mild hyperthyroidism 
C.  It is almost always fatal
D.  It converts to hypothyroidism