ABG interpretation &Acid base imbalance
Prepared by :
Assist professor Dr:Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outline
1. components of buffering systems 
2. ABG interpretation 
3. Alteration in acid base
1. Respiratory acidosis
1. Physiological Respiratory acidosis 
2. Causes 
3. Clinical assessment findings for patients with 
Respiratory acidosis 
4. Management for Respiratory acidosis 
2. Respiratory Alkalosis
1. Physiological Respiratory Alkalosis
2. Causes 
3. Clinical assessment findings for patients with 
Respiratory Alkalosis
4. Management for Respiratory Alkalosis

Outline
1. Alteration in acid base
1. Metabolic acidosis
1. Physiological Metabolic acidosis 
2. Causes 
3. Clinical assessment findings for patients with Metabolic acidosis 
4. Management for Metabolic acidosis 
2. Metabolic Alkalosis
1. Physiological Metabolic Alkalosis
2. Causes 
3. Clinical assessment findings for patients with Metabolic Alkalosis
4. Management for Metabolic Alkalosis

Buffer System
The body regulates acid-base 
balance through the buffer 
system. The buffer system can be 
described as a mechanism for the 
neutralization of acids.  
 Buffer system prevent major 
changes in the pH of body fluids 
by removing or releasing H+; 
they can act quickly to prevent 
excessive changes in H+ 
concentration.

Three buffer systems exist for maintaining 
acid-base status:  
*Blood  
*Respiratory 
system  
*Kidney

The Blood Buffer System  
• Activated as the H+ concentration changes. 
As H+ level increases, the pH falls, resulting 
in acidosis.  
•  Bicarbonate (HCO3) then combines with H+ 
to form carbonic acid (H2CO3).  
•  Carbonic acid then breaks down into carbon 
dioxide (which is excreted through the lungs) 
and water (H2O).

The Respiratory Buffer System  
The lungs react to correct imbalance by 
altering the rate and depth of respiration.  
➢In metabolic acidosis: the respiratory rate increase, 
resulting in a greater amount exhaled carbon dioxide which 
results in decrease acidic level by excreting excess carbon 
dioxide from the lungs (to reduce the acid load).  
➢In metabolic alkalosis: the respiratory rate decreases, 
causing CO2 to be retained (to increase the acid load)

The Renal Buffer System  
• The kidneys also play an important role 
in maintaining acid-base homeostasis 
by regulating the pH of the blood 
plasma.  
• The kidneys have two very important 
roles in maintaining the acid-base 
balance:
1. Reabsorb bicarbonate from urine
2. Excrete hydrogen ions into urine.

The Renal Buffer System
• The kidneys are slower to compensate than 
the lungs; may take up to 2 days to regulate 
acid base balance.  
• In respiratory acidosis: kidneys excrete 
hydrogen ions and conserve bicarbonate ions 
to help restore balance.  
• In respiratory alkalosis: kidneys retain 
hydrogen ions and excrete bicarbonate ions 
to help restore balance.

Steps in Arterial Blood Gas Interpretation
Arterial blood gas results should be interpreted 
systematically.
The oxygenation is evaluated first.  
Second, the acid-base status is determined.  
Third, the primary imbalance is identified.
Last, compensation is identified

Step 1: Evaluate Oxygenation 
Oxygenation is analyzed by evaluation of the PaO2 and the SaO2. If the 
PaO2 is less than the expected normal range, hypoxemia exists

Step 2: Evaluate Acid-Base Status 
Evaluate the pH.  A pH of less than 7.35 indicates the presence of 
acidemia; a pH of greater than 7.45 indicates presence of alkalemia.

Evaluate the PaCO2.
❖ A PaCO2 of less than 35 mmHg indicates the presence of  
respiratory alkalosis or hyperventilation; 
❖ a PaCO2 of greater than 45 mm Hg indicates the presence of 
respiratory acidosis or hypoventilation.

Evaluate the HCO3
❖ An HCO3 value of less than 22 Meq\L indicates the presence  of 
metabolic acidosis; 
❖ a HCO3 of greater than 26 Meq\L indicates the presence of 
metabolic alkalosis.

Step 3: Determine the primary acid-base 
Imbalance
The primary cause of the acid-base imbalance is determined by 
evaluation of the pH. If the pH is less than 7.35, the primary disorder is 
acidosis. If the pH is greater than 7.45, the primary disorder is alkalosis

Step 4: Determine Compensation 
The body has three buffer systems that maintain a constant acid-base balance. 
▪ Normal pH is fully compensated. 
▪ Abnormal pH is partially compensated.
 Example 1 :  a 47-year-old kidney dialysis patient is admitted to the hospital. 
He has missed his last 2 dialysis treatments. His blood gas results are as follows: 
What the interpretation of this result?  pH 7.32, PaCO2 34,  HCO3 18

Example 1: Steps in Arterial Blood Gas Interpretation
Step 1: Examine the pH level. It is low, therefore it is acidosis.  
Step 2: Examine the PaCO2 level. It is low. The pH and PaCO2 aremoving in the 
same direction; therefore this is a metabolic disorder. In this case, the lungs are now 
attempting to compensate by “blowing off” excessive CO2, and therefore increasing the 
pH.  
Step 3: Examine the HCO3 level. It is low. This confirms that it is a metabolic issue. 
 Interpretation = metabolic acidosis  with partially compensated

Alteration in acid base
• Respiratory Acidosis
• Respiratory alkalosis 
• Metabolic Acidosis
• Metabolic alkalosis

Respiratory Acidosis 
• is a medical emergency in which decreased ventilation 
(hypoventilation) increases the concentration of carbon dioxide in 
the blood and decreases the blood's pH (a condition generally 
called acidosis). 
• Alveolar hypoventilation thus leads to an increased PaCO2 (a 
condition called hypercapnia). The increase in PaCO2 in turn 
decreases the HCO3−/PaCO2 ratio and decreases pH

Types of Respiratory Acidosis 
Acute Respiratory Acidosis
  The PaCO2 is elevated above the upper limit of the reference range 
(over 45 mmHg) with an accompanying acidemia (pH <7.35). 
• Chronic Respiratory Acidosis, 
 The PaCO2 is elevated above the upper limit of the reference range, with 
a normal blood pH (7.35 to 7.45) or near-normal pH secondary to renal 
compensation and an elevated serum bicarbonate (HCO3 >30 mEq\l). 
Respiratory Acidosis                     Metabolic alkalosis
                                                    Compensate

Causes of Respiratory Acidosis
1- Inhibition of the Medullary Respiratory Center
A.  Acute causes:  
 -Drugs: anesthetics, sedatives                                                  - Oxygen in chronic hypercapnia  
 - Cardiac arrest                                                                          - Central sleep apnea
B . Chronic causes: 
 -Extreme obesity (pickwickian syndrome)         - Central nervous system disease (rare) 
 -Metabolic alkalosis 
2- Disorders of the Respiratory Muscles and Chest Wall 
A- A cute causes:
 -Muscle weakness: myasthenia gravis, periodic paralysis,      -Guillain-Barré syndrome                                  
-Severe hypokalemia                    -Hypophosphatemia 
B. Chronic cause : 
 -Muscle weakness: spinal cord injury, poliomyelitis, multiple  sclerosis, and myxedema                   
-Kyphoscoliosis         -Extreme obesity

Causes of Respiratory Acidosis 
3-Upper Airway obstruction 
-Aspiration -Obstructive sleep apnea         -laryngospasm                   Mechanical Ventilation
Permissive hypercapnia                                               Reversal of hyperventilation
4- Disorders affecting Gas Exchange Across the   Pulmonary Capillary
A.  A cute
 - Acute respiratory distress syndrome
 -Acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema
 - Severe asthma or pneumonia
 -Pneumothorax /Pulmonary hemorrhage
B. Chronic: 
 COPD, bronchitis, emphysema and extreme obesity

Symptoms of Respiratory Acidosis 
• The initial symptoms include:  
1. Headache, blurred vision,  
2. Restlessness, and anxiety, which can progress to tremors, 
asterixis, delirium, and somnolence (called CO2 narcosis). 
3. The cerebrospinal fluid pressure is often elevated  
4. Papilledema may be seen. 
5. Arrhythmias and peripheral vasodilatation can produce 
hypotension if the systemic pH falls below 7.10.  
6. Rapid shallow respiration, muscle weakness.

Symptoms of Respiratory Acidosis 
Chronic respiratory acidosis is also associated with: 
1. Corpulmonale and peripheral edema.  
2. The cardiac output and glomerular filtration rate 
are usually normal in this disorder 
3. Memory loss, sleep disturbances, and personality 
changes

Management of Respiratory Acidosis 
Treating acute acidosis usually means addressing the underlying cause.
• The criteria for admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) 
include 
1. Patient confusion, 
2. Lethargy
3. Respiratory muscle fatigue, and a low pH (< 7.25). For example airway may 
need to be cleared. This must be done as soon as possible. 
Artificial ventilation may also be needed.

Management of Respiratory Acidosis 
•Infusion of sodium bicarbonate is rarely indicated. This measure may be considered 
after cardiopulmonary arrest with an extremely low pH (< 7.0 - 7.10). In most other 
situations, sodium bicarbonate has no role in the treatment of respiratory acidosis 
Chronic Respiratory Acidosis 
The goal is to improve airway function. Some strategies include: 
 Antibiotics to treat infection 
 Diuretics to reduce excess fluid affecting the heart and lungs 
 Bronchodilators to expand the airways 
 Corticosteroids to reduce inflammation 
 Mechanical ventilation in severe cases

Respiratory Alkalosis 
•Is a medical condition in which increased 
respiration elevates the blood pH beyond the 
normal range (7.35–7.45) with a concurrent 
reduction in arterial levels of carbon dioxide.

Types of Respiratory Alkalosis 
There are two types of respiratory alkalosis: chronic and acute as 
a result of the 3-5 day delay in kidney compensation of the 
abnormality. 
✓ Acute respiratory alkalosis occurs rapidly, have a high pH because 
the response of the kidneys is slow. 
✓ Chronic respiratory alkalosis is a more long-standing condition; 
the kidneys have time to decrease the bicarbonate level

Causes of Respiratory Alkalosis 
• Heart attack                    - Pain 
• Anxiety 
• Asthma                            - Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
• Infection                          - Pulmonary Embolism 
• Pregnancy Stress              - Pulmonary disorder 
• Fever                               - Liver disease 
• Heart disorder or other, including improper mechanical ventilation. 
• V ocal cord paralysis (compensation for loss of vocal volume results in 
overbreathing/breathlessness). 
• Salicylate poisoning (aspirin overdose)

Symptoms of Respiratory Alkalosis 
• Tachypnea  
• Dizziness 
• Hypokalemia  
• Lethargy & Confusion 
• Dry mouth 
• Tingling in the arms 
• Heart palpitations 
• Impaired neuromuscular function (e.g., paresthesias, tetany, tremor) 
• Nausea & vomiting

Management of  Respiratory Alkalosis 
The treatment for respiratory alkalosis depends on the 
underlying cause. 
1-Panic and anxiety-related causes 
• Treating the condition is a matter of raising carbon dioxide levels in 
the blood.  
• The following strategies and tips are useful for respiratory alkalosis 
caused by over breathing due to panic and anxiety.

Management of  Respiratory Alkalosis 
2. Breathe into a paper bag 
▪ Fill the paper bag with carbon dioxide by exhaling into it. 
▪ Breathe the exhaled air from the bag back into the lungs. 
▪ Repeat this several times. 
3- Reassurance 
• The symptoms of respiratory alkalosis can be frightening. This often 
causes faster and deeper breathing, making things worse.  
• Having a calm loved one provide reassurance could help get breathing 
under control.

Management of  Respiratory Alkalosis 
Restrict oxygen intake into the lungs 
• To do this, try breathing while pursing the lips or breathing 
through one nostril.  
• For the second approach to be useful, the mouth and the other 
nostril need to be covered.

Metabolic Acidosis
 Bicarbonate deficit  - blood concentrations of bicarb drop below 22mEq/L
• Causes Metabolic Acidosis
– Accumulation of acids (lactic acid or ketones)(Diabetes ketoacidosis (DKA)
– Loss of bicarbonate through diarrhea or renal dysfunction
– Kidney disease is one of the most common causes of metabolic acidosis. Because 
kidneys are not able to remove enough acid from blood, causing a build-up in body.
– CKD(chronic kidney disease
–  Acute kidney injury (AKI). Healthy kidneys remove natural waste products from 
blood, including acids.
– Hyperkalemia (high potassium levels)   -Albuminuria   
– -Smoking      - Anemia (low red blood cell level

Symptoms of Metabolic Acidosis
• Headache, lethargy
• Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
• Coma     -Death
• Compensation for Metabolic Acidosis
• Increased ventilation
• Renal excretion of hydrogen ions if possible
• K+ exchanges  with excess H+ in ECF ,( H+ into cells, K+ out of cells)