Cardiac 
surgery
Prepared by 
Dr Ghada Elsayed

Outlines:
• Anatomy of the heart:
• Definition of Open Heart Surgery
• Indication of open heart surgery
• Recent techniques in open heart 
surgery
• What is a heart-lung machine?
• What is Off-pump surgery?
• What are cooling techniques?
• Open heart Surgery 
Complications
• Nursing Care of the Post-
Operative for open heart surgery 
Patient

Pre test 
Mention 
indication of 
cardiac surgry 
Mention 
complication 
post cardiac 
surgry

Definition of 
Open Heart 
Surgery:
pericardium
Open heart surgery is a type of heart surgery 
that requires the heart to be opened in order 
to perform the cardiac intervension. 
In these cases, the sternum (breast bone) is 
cut in half vertically so the chest can be 
opened, making the heart visible.
The pericardium is then pulled away from 
the heart, giving the surgeon direct access.

Indication of 
open heart 
surgery:
ischemic heart disease
coronary artery bypass grafting
congenital heart disease
heart
great vessels birth
aortic mitral valves
pulmonary tricuspid valves
Heart transplantation
transplant
heart failure
coronary artery disease
Treat complications of ischemic heart disease (for 
example, coronary artery bypass grafting),
Correct congenital heart disease, A congenital heart 
defect (CHD) is a defect in the structure of the heart and 
great vessels which is present at birth. 
Valvular heart disease (the aortic and mitral valves on 
the left and the pulmonary and tricuspid valves on the 
right).
Heart transplantation. Hearts transplants or cardiac 
transplantation is a surgical transplant procedure 
performed on patients with end-stage heart failure or 
severe coronary artery disease.

Recent 
techniques in 
open heart 
surgery:
• Newer techniques allow heart surgery to be done 
through much smaller surgical cuts than the large cut 
needed for open surgery.
• The heart surgeon will make a 2-inch to 5-inch-long 
surgical cut in the chest wall. 
• Muscles in the area will be divided so the surgeon can 
reach the heart.
• The surgeon can repair or replace a valve or perform 
bypass surgery. 
• During endoscopic surgery, the surgeon makes one to 
four small holes in the chest. 
• Then the surgeon uses special instruments and a 
camera to perform the surgery.

What is a 
heart-lung 
machine?
The heart-lung machine is also called a 
cardiopulmonary bypass machine.
It takes over for the heart by replacing the heart's 
'pumping action and by adding oxygen to the 
blood. 
This means that the heart will be still for the 
operation, which is necessary when the heart has 
to be opened (open heart surgery).
Because the heart-lung machine takes over the 
work of the heart, surgeons can operate on a heart 
that is not moving or full of blood.

When the patient is connected to the heart-lung machine, it does the same job that the heart and 
lungs would do. 
The heart-lung machine carries blood from the upper-right chamber of the heart (the right atrium) 
to a special reservoir called an oxygenator.
Inside the oxygenator, oxygen bubbles up through the blood and enters the red blood cells.
This causes the blood to turn from dark (oxygen-poor) to bright red (oxygen-rich). 
Then, a filter removes the air bubbles from the oxygen-rich blood, and the blood travels through a 
plastic tube to the body's’main blood conduit (the aorta).
From the aorta, the blood moves throughout the rest of the body.

The heart-lung machine can take over the work of the heart and lungs 
for hours. 
Trained technicians called perfusion technologists (blood flow 
specialists) make sure that the heart-lung machine does its job 
properly during the surgery. 
Even so, surgeons still try to limit the time that patients must spend 
hooked up to the machine.

What is Off-
pump 
surgery?
• Off-pump coronary artery bypass or "beating heart" 
surgery is a form of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) 
surgery performed without cardiopulmonary bypass
(heart-lung machine) as a treatment for coronary heart 
disease.
• During most bypass surgeries, the heart is stopped and 
a heart-lung machine takes over the work of the heart 
and lungs. 
• When a cardiac surgeon chooses to perform the CABG 
procedure off-pump, also known as OPCAB (Off-pump 
Coronary Artery Bypass), the heart is still beating while 
the graft attachments are made to bypass a blockage

Off-pump coronary artery bypass was developed partly to avoid 
the complications of cardiopulmonary bypass during cardiac 
surgery.
The potential benefits/advantages of off-pump surgery may 
include the following: 
Reduced need for blood transfusions 
Reduced risk of bleeding, stroke and kidney failure
Potential for reduced psychomotor and cognitive problems
High-risk patients with additional diseases like lung disease, 
kidney failure and peripheral vascular disease may benefit from 
this kind of operation

What are 
cooling 
techniques?
Cooling techniques let surgeons stop the heart for long periods 
without damaging the heart tissue. 
Cool temperatures avoid damage to the heart tissue by reducing 
the heart's need for oxygen.
The heart may be cooled in 2 ways:
Blood is cooled as it passes through the heart-lung machine. In 
turn, this cooled blood lowers body temperature when it reaches 
all of the body parts.
Cold salt-water (saline) is poured over the heart.

After cooling, the heart slows 
and stops. 
Injecting a special potassium 
solution into the heart can 
speed up this process and stop 
the heart completely. 
The heart is then usually safe 
from tissue injury for 2 to 4 
hours.

Complications 
of open-heart 
Surgery:
Complications During and After Heart Surgery
Bleeding: May occur at the incision site or from the 
area of the heart where surgery is performed 
Abnormal heart rhythm: In rare cases a temporary 
external, or permanent internal pacemaker may be 
necessary to correct this problem. 
Ischemic heart damage: Damage to heart tissue 
caused by a lack of blood flow to the heart 
Death: The risk of death is increased in surgeries where 
the heart is stopped for the procedure.

Complication 
of cardiac 
surgry
• Blood clots: Clots may form in and around the heart or 
travel through the bloodstream. 
• Stroke: Often caused by clots that form in the blood 
after surgery; Impairment of the brain function may be 
caused as result of blood clots, which in turn restricts 
the blood and oxygen supply to the brain.
• Cardiac tamponade (pericardial tamponade): A life-
threatening condition where the pericardium, the sac 
surrounding the heart, fills with blood. 
• This makes it difficult, or impossible, for the heart to 
fully function.

Lung Complications:
As all known, the functioning of lungs and heart are related indirectly. 
In open heart surgery, patients lung problems do develop after the procedure, respiratory 
tract infections, bleeding and in severe cases, lung failure.
Minor Problems
Heart surgeries may result in temporary problems like 
Nausea, vomiting,
Bruising, inflammation, scar formation, skin numbness, skin allergic reactions

Global Overview about Before, During and 
After Open Heart Surgery: 
• 1) Preoperative instruction and preparation for 
Open Heart Surgery:
• Before having open heart surgery,
• The patient will meet with the cardiothoracic 
surgeon, who will already have reviewed the tests
• (such as films from the angiography) and will 
explain the results of these tests, what the surgery 
entails, the benefits the patient can expect from 
surgery, and, especially, the risks of surgery. 
• This meeting provides the patient a chance to voice 
fears, ask questions, and perhaps look over the 
angiogram film to develop a better understanding 
of why the operation is necessary.

Approximately two weeks before 
the surgery, 
• The patient may be instructed to stop taking any 
medications that might affect the ability of the blood to 
clot, including aspirin, and warfarin (Coumadin). 
• The patient should continue taking beta blockers and 
calcium antagonists if he or she is on them and can 
continue use of nitrates to relieve chest pain.

The day before the operation, 
The patient will be expected to check into the hospital and again 
undergo a battery of tests—chest X-ray, ECGs, blood tests, urinalysis 
even though he or she may recently have had all these tests. 
This is an important step to make sure that there has been no change 
in the status of the patient’s health and to ensure that no small but 
important detail has been omitted.

The night 
before the 
surgery
• The patient will be asked to shower in 
order to reduce the bacteria on the skin. 
• Fasting after midnight, because 
anesthesia is safer on an empty stomach. 
• The anesthesiologist will usually visit the 
patient the night before in order to explain 
what the anesthesia does and how the 
anesthesia team takes care of the 
patient’s breathing with the respirator. 
• The chest area will be scrubbed clean and 
washed with an antiseptic solution, and 
body hair will be shaved where necessary.

On the day 
of surgery:
• On the morning of surgery, 
• The patient is given a mild tranquilizer to 
reduce any anxiety related to the 
operation. 
• Electrodes connected to an ECG monitor 
are then attached to the patient’s back to 
allow constant monitoring of the heart’s 
electrical activity during the operation. 
• Following the administration of a local 
anesthetic, intravenous (IV) lines are 
inserted into the veins of the arm or wrist.

• A Foley catheter is inserted into the patient’s bladder 
before the operation. 
• Anesthetic agents are then administered directly into 
the veins. 
• These agents have three functions: to block pain and 
induce drowsiness, to relax the muscles and prevent 
the person from moving and jerking during the 
operation, 
• Once the patient has been anesthetized, a tube 
(endotracheal) is inserted into the patient’s windpipe.
• The tube connects to the respirator a bellows-like 
instrument that performs the work of breathing for the 
patient.

Another tube (nasogastric, or NG) is also inserted 
to collect stomach fluids that might otherwise 
nauseate the anesthetized patient.
An anticoagulant, heparin, is also administered at 
the start of the operation.
This “blood-thinner” prevents clots, or emboli, 
from forming and helps to protect the patient from 
a stroke. 
Once the patient has been prepared, the surgeons 
begin. For open-heart surgery

After the surgery:
The patient is taken to the intensive care unit (ICU), where specialized nursing care is 
available around the clock and instruments monitor the heart’s electrical activity, 
blood pressure, temperature, and other vital signs.
The patient’s family will generally be allowed to visit at this time, although the patient 
will be confused from the anesthetic and unable to speak because of a tube in the 
windpipe (endotracheal) that helps the person breathe with a respirator. 
The ICU experience can be disorienting, as there is little to differentiate day and night, 
and the patient will drift in and out of consciousness.

Nursing Care of 
the Post-
Operative for 
open heart 
surgery Patient 
:
Patients will be cared for in the ICU during the 
immediate Post-operative period.
After extubation and when hemodynami-cally stable, 
they will be transferred to Cardiac Step-Down Unit. 
DESIRED PATIENT OUTCOMES: 
1. Patient will experience minimal/no complications 
related to CABG surgery. 
2. Patient will achieve maximal level of comfort during 
the post-operative period.

CLINICAL 
ASSESSMENT 
AND CARE: 
• A. PATIENT ARRIVAL 
• 1. The primary RN will take report and initial orders 
from the anesthesiologist in conjunction with ICU 
house staff. 
• 2. The RN assigned to help the primary RN will:
• a. Connect patient to the monitoring system. 
• b. Connect chest tubes to wall suction. 
• c. Note type and rate of intravenous infusions, isolate 
volume line. 
• d. Validate respiratory settings on ventilator with 
respiratory therapy. 
• e. Attach warming apparatus. 
• f. Autotransfusion per MD order.

B. INITIAL 
POST-OP 
ASSESSMENT 
• I) To be completed within 15 minutes of arrival to ICU: 
• 1. Perform a brief physical assessment and validate 
the status of the following with the physician/house 
staff. 
• a. Cardiovascular Status: 
• 1) Obtain full set of vital signs. 
• 2) Obtain a cardiac profile and verify waveforms. 
• 3) Verify EKG rhythm, verify evidence of pacer capture 
if appropriate. 
• 4) Note amount/quality of chest tube drainage. 
• 5) Note quality of peripheral pulses, temperature and 
color of extremities. 
• 6) Demand pacemaker settings.

b. Respiratory Status: 
1) Check ETT size and 
position. 
1
2) Auscultate 
bilaterally for breath 
sounds, note pres-
ence of adventitious 
breath sounds. 
2
3) Obtain O sats via 
probe. 
3
4) Obtain ABG as MD 
order. 
4
5) Note peak 
pressures, expiratory 
volumes and minute 
ventilation on current 
vent settings. 
5

• c. Neuromuscular Status: 
• 1) Validate LOC. 
• 2) Check for pupil reactivity. 
• 3) Check for quality and quantity of motor response. 
• 4) Identify type and time of last dose of anesthesia, narcotic or 
paralyzing agent used. 
• d. Genitourinary Status: 
• 1) Measure urine output.

• a. Integumentary Status: 
• 1) Note presence and characteristics of wound(s): 
• a) chest 
• b) legs/arms - check ace bandages per MD order 
• 2) Note presence and characteristics of exit site(s): 
• a) Catheters 
• b) Drains 
• c) Pacer wires 
• 3) Assess pressure points for erythema/potential points of 
break down. 
• b. Gastrointestinal Status: 
• 1) Check bowel sounds. 
• 2) Verify placement of N/G tube, if applicable. Attach to 
wall suction per MD order.

• C. INITIAL POST-OP CARE: 
• 1. To be done jointly by primary RN and helper RN within 30 minutes of arrival. 
• 2. Review Post-operative orders, clarify as needed.
• 3. Obtain 12-lead EKG and chest x-ray as per MD order. 
• 4. Titrate intravenous medication solutions according to MD parameters and 
based on patient's weight. 
• 5. Initiate measures to warm patient. 
• 6. Obtain cardiac profile, if applicable.

ONGOING 
ASSESSMENT 
• 1. Obtain vital signs every 15 minutes for 4 hours or prn, every 30 
minutes for 4 hours, then every 1 hour until stable. 
• a. Obtain core or rectal temperature every 4°. 
• b. Discontinue warming measures when temperature reaches 
37.5° c. 
• 2. Obtain Cardiac profiles as per Hemodynamic monitoring 
protocol and as per MD order.
• Evaluate need for volume, medications or withdrawal of 
medications. 
• 3. Monitor respiratory status as per Ventilator protocol. Initiate 
Weaning Protocol when appropriate. 
• 4. Monitor temperature of extremities, color, capillary refill, 
presence of edema, quality of pulses, and motor, function and 
sensation every 4°. 
• 5. Monitor I+O every 1°.
• Assess need for diuretic therapy in collaboration with house staff.

• 6. Monitor chest tube drainage every 15 minutes for initial 1-2 hours, 
then q1-2 hour for 24° then every 2-4° until discontinued. From post-op 
hour 2-24, drainage should decrease to less than 30cc/hour. 
• CT may be discontinued on post-op day 1 when CT output less than 
80cc for 8-12°. 
• 7. Monitor neuro status every 1° till stable, then every 2°. Reorient 
patient to time, surroundings and person as appropriate. 
• 8. Check wounds, pacer wires and dressings every 2°. 
• 9. Assess bowel sounds every 4° while intubated, monitor for flatus.

• 10. Assess heart sounds every 1-2°, x6-8 hours, note any 
additional sounds or new murmurs. Then assess heart sounds q2-
4° after this. Assess more frequently if the patient develops 
changes in vital signs or significant changes in chest tube output. 
• 11. Report the following symptoms immediately to the MD: 
• a. CT drainage > 100cc/hr

• b. Sudden onset or change in: 
• 1) EKG rhythm 
• 2) C.O. (outside of MD parameters) 
• 3) Systolic blood pressure < 90 or > 140mm Hg 
• 4) MAP < 60mm Hg 
• c. Extreme shivering 
• d. Extreme agitation despite medication 
• e. Any sudden or dramatic change in neuro status

g. Poor ABG's or drop in O2 sat from baseline 
h. Dehiscence of wounds 
12. Report any of the following promptly to the MD (within 30 minutes): 
a. Any evidence of CHF 
b. Decreased urine output < 30cc/hr 
c. T > 102° F 
d. Saturation of chest and/or graft dressing within a short time span (< 1 hour) 
e. HCT < 27

E. ONGOING PATIENT CARE 
1. Respiratory: 
a. Continually monitor SaO sat via probe. 
b. Obtain ABG's per MD order. 
c. Wean from ventilator as per protocol. 
d. Turn, cough and deep breathe every 2°. 
e. Post extubation, initiate Respiratory Care Protocol. 
f. Incentive spirometer every 1-2° while awake, and PRN post extubation, per MD order. 
g. Assist patient in use of pillows to splint incision while coughing.