Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation 
Prepared by/
Dr/ Naglaa Nassar

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Introduction
Codes are called when patients have a cardiac and/or respiratory arrest or a
life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmia that causes a loss of consciousness.
Code management refers to the initiation of a code and the lifesaving
interventions performed when a patient arrests .

Rapid Response Teams (RRTs)
Have recently been implemented to address changes in a patient's’ clinical condition
before a cardiac and/or respiratory arrest occurs. The intent of a RRT is preventing the
cardiac and/or respiratory arrest, from ever occurring . The role of RRTs in preventing
cardiopulmonary arrest, the roles of the personnel involved in a code, and equipment that
must be readily available to support interventions of the RRT or during a code. Basic and
advanced life support measures are presented, including medications commonly used
during a code.

Definition of Cardiac Arrest 
Cardiac arrest is defined as abrupt cessation of effective cardiac 
pumping activity, resulting in cessation of circulation. Unless definitive 
action is taken within 4 to 6 minutes, the patient will suffer irreversible 
brain injury.

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) 
Resuscitation is a restoration of vital signs by mechanical,
physiological, and pharmacological means.
Code is an informal term for emergency resuscitation. Code
management refers to the initiation of a code and the lifesaving
interventions performed when a patient arrests

Causes of Cardiopulmonary Arrest 
• Cardiac Causes 
• Pulmonary Causes
• Electrolyte Imbalances Causes
• Procedural Causes

Causes of Cardiopulmonary Arrest
Cardiac Causes
• Myocardial Infarction 
• Heart Failure 
• Dysrhythmia 
• Coronary artery spasms 
• Cardiac tamponade 
Pulmonary Causes
• Respiratory failure secondary to 
respiratory depression 
• Airway obstruction 
• Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 
(ARDS) 
• Impaired ventilation, such as 
pneumothorax

Cont, Causes of Cardiopulmonary Arrest
Electrolyte Imbalances Causes
• Hyperkalemia
• Hypomagnesemia
• Hypercalcemia/hypocalcemi
a
Procedural Causes
• Pulmonary artery
catheterization
• Cardiac catheterization
• Surgery

Basic Life Support (BLS)
1. Check Responsiveness
1) The nurse first determines the patient's’responsiveness before initiating
CPR. Tap and shout, ‘Are you all right?
1. The nurse should take no more than 10 seconds to check for breathing and
pulse before initiating CPR.
2. The nurse calls for help ("initiate a code")”and initiates BLS measures. In
the new American Heart Association (AHA) Guidelines for CPR, the new
acronym to guide resuscitative efforts is C-A-B, rather than A-B-C as in
previous years

Check  Circulation,  Airway  and   
Breathing
The patient should be placed in a
supine position on a firm, flat
surface. A back or "cardiac" board is
usually located on the back or side
of the cart. It is placed under the
patient as soon as possible to
provide a hard, level surface for the
performance of chest compressions

Circulation
• Compress chest at rate of at least 100/min
• Compress chest to a depth at least 2 inches
• Place backboard or use CPR setting on bed
• Watch ECG monitor to assist with ensuring rate
• Palpate pulses (radial, femoral, pedal) to determine effectiveness of
compressions
• Measure blood pressure manually

• The arrival of a second rescuer allows for compressions to continue while the
second rescuer can open the airway and be ready to deliver breaths via a bag-
valve device when the initial rescuer has completed a 30 chest compression
cycle. The chest must be allowed to fully recoil between compressions. This
rhythm is maintained at the rate of at least 100 times/min.

Airway
Open patients airway using head tilt-chin
lift maneuver (jaw thrust for cervically
injured patients). If spontaneous
respirations have not returned once a
patent airway has been established, then
the patient must be assisted with
breathing. head tilt-chin lift maneuver

Breathing
• Use Ambu bag, set for 100% oxygen (oxygen source set at 15 L/min).
• Aim for compression to breath ratio 30:2.
• Deliver breaths at rate of 6-8/min once advanced airway is in position.
• Maintain seal around patient's’mouth and nose.
• Observe for chest rise and fall.
• A second person assisting with CPR, auscultate all lung fields to confirm that the delivered breaths are
reaching the lungs. Pulse oximetry is used to determine oxygenation.

Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) 
Airway
Airway management involves reassessment of original techniques established
in BLS. Endotracheal intubation provides definitive airway management.
Breathing
Breathing assessment determines whether the ventilatory efforts are causing the 
chest to rise. If the patient is intubated, ETT placement is confirmed by bilateral 
breath sounds and observation of chest movement with 
ventilation. A chest radiograph confirms placement after the code.

Circulation
➢ Circulation initially focuses on chest compressions, attachment of
electrodes and leads to the monitor-defibrillator, rhythm
identification, IV access, and medication administration.
➢ If ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia is
identified, high energy unsynchronized shocks are delivered followed
by two minutes of chest compressions with ventilation.
➢ A patent IV is necessary during an arrest for the administration of
fluids, medications, or both.

Role of Resuscitation Team Members
When a cardiopulmonary arrest (“code”) is called, various
members of the emergency response team are notified. Key personnel
are notified to assist with code management
Director of the Code (Physician/Nurse Practitioner/ Advanced Cardiac
Life Support (ACLS) Qualified Personnel)

Role of 
Resuscitation 
Team Members
Roles and Responsibilities of Code Team Members
Team Member Primary Role 
Leader of the code (usually a physician) Directs code 
Makes diagnoses and treatment decisions  
Primary nurse Provides information to code leader 
Measures vital signs 
Assists with procedures  
Administers medications 
Second nurse Coordinates use of the crash cart 
Prepares medications 
Assembles equipment (intubation, suction) 
Nursing supervisor Controls the crowd  
Contacts the attending physician  
Assists with medications and procedures  
Ensures that a bed is available in critical care unit (ICU) 
Assists with transfer of the patient to the ICU  
Nurse or assistant Records events on designated form 
Anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist Intubates  patient 
Manages airway and oxygenation 
Respiratory therapist Assists with ventilation and intubation 
Obtains blood sample for ABG analysis 
Sets up respiratory equipment/mechanical ventilator 
Pharmacist or pharmacy technician Assists with medication preparation 
Prepares intravenous infusions 
ECG technician  obtains a12-lead ECG

Equipment used in Cardiopulmonary Arrest
While the first person to recognize a code calls for helps and begins
life support measures, another team member immediately brings the
crash cart and defibrillator to the patient's’bedside. The carts must be
inventoried daily to ensure their contents are complete and available in
the event of a cardiopulmonary arrest.

Contents of a Crash Cart 
MAIN ITEMS SPECIFIC SUPPLIES  
Back 
Cardiac board 
Side 
Portable suction machine, bag-valve device, and oxygen tubing Suction device with canister and tubing, face mask, and oxygen tank container for
disposing of needles, syringes, and other sharp items
Top 
Monitor-defibrillator with recorder, clipboard with code record and drug calculation
reference sheets
ECG leads, electrodes, conductive gel or adhesive electrode pads; possible
transcutaneous pacemaker or combination unit
Airway equipment drawer or box Oral and nasal airways, ETTs, laryngoscope handle and curved and straight blades,
lubricating jelly, 10 mL syringes, and tape
IV equipment drawer IV catheters of various sizes, tape, syringes, needles, IV fluids (NS, Ringer's’lactate
solution, and D5W); and IV tubing
Medication drawer or box All IV push emergency medications in prefilled syringes if available, sterile water and
NS for injection, and IV infusion emergency medications
Miscellaneous supply drawer Sterile and non sterile gloves, suction catheters, nasogastric tubes, chest tubes, blood
pressure cuff, blood collection tubes, sutures, pacemaker magnet, extra ECG
recording paper, gauze pads, face masks 
Procedure kits  Arterial blood gases, tracheotomy, , central line insertion kit, chest tube tray

Medications used to treat a patient in Cardiac arrest
Medications that are administered during a code depend on several factors:
cause of the arrest, patient's’cardiac rhythm, physician's’preference, patient's’response.
Goals of Treatment
* Reestablish and maintain optimal cardiac function
* Correct hypoxemia and acidosis
* Suppress dangerous cardiac ectopic activity
* In addition, medications are used to achieve a balance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand
* Maintain adequate blood pressure, and to relieve heart failure.

1. Epinephrine (Adrenalin)
Mechanism of action
➢ Because of its alpha-adrenergic and beta-adrenergic Effect. Epinephrine is a potent vasoconstrictor. Epinephrine
increases systemic vascular resistance and arterial blood pressure, as well as heart rate, contractility, and
automaticity of cardiac pacemaker cells.
Indication
➢ Indicated for the restoration of cardiac electrical activity in an arrest
➢ Epinephrine is used to treat VF or pulseless VT that is unresponsive to initial defibrillation, asystole, and PEA.
➢ During a code, epinephrine may be given IV
Dosage
➢ The IV dosage is 1.0 mg and is repeated every 3 to 5 minutes as needed
➢ Epinephrine may be administered by continuous infusion to increase the heart rate or blood pressure.
➢ (N.B) because epinephrine increases myocardial oxygen requirements, the nurse must monitor the patient closely
for signs of myocardial ischemia.
Side effect
➢ Tachycardia
➢ Hypertension

2. Vasopressin a potent vasoconstrictor  
Action
❖ Vasopressin is recommended as an alternative to Epinephrine administration in VF
unresponsive to shock.
Dose
❖ A single dose of 40 units IV
❖ Administration of the drug is not recommended for conscious patients with
coronary artery disease because severe angina can result from the vasoconstriction.
Side effect
Myocardial ischemia

3. Atropine (Anticholinergic agent)  
Action
Atropine is used to increase the heart rate by decreasing the vagal tone
Indication
❖ It is indicated for patients with symptomatic bradycardia.
❖ For symptomatic bradycardia, atropine 0.5 mg IV is given and repeated every 3 to 5 minutes as needed (for a
total of 3 mg) to maintain a heart rate greater than 60 beats per minute or until adequate tissue perfusion is
achieved as indicated by blood pressure and level of consciousness.
❖ In asystole a single dose of 3 mg should be given .
Side Effect
❖ Atropine is used cautiously in acute coronary ischemia or myocardial infarction because the increased heart
rate may worsen ischemia or increase infarction size.

4. Amiodarone (Cordarone) Antiarrthymic class
Action
Decrease membrane excitability, prolongs action potential to terminate VT . dilating coronary arteries and
increasing coronary blood supply (potent vasodilator)
Indication
❖ Treatment and prophylaxis of recurrent VF : and hemodynamically unstable VT; rapid atrial dysrhythmias
❖ Cardiac Arrest Dose: 300 mg IV push followed by a dose of 150 mg
Recurrent VF/VT: 150 mg IV over 10 minutes (15 mg per minute);  may repeat 150 mg IV every 10 minutes as needed 
followed by 360 mg infusion for 6 hours 
Side effect  
* Bradycardia
* Hypotension

5. Sodium Bicarbonate
❖ A patient who has experienced an arrest quickly becomes acidotic.
❖ Acidosis results from two sources: no blood flow during the arrest,
and low blood flow during CPR.
❖ Effective ventilation with supplemental oxygen and rapid 
restoration of tissue perfusion by CPR and spontaneous circulation 
are the best mechanisms to correct these causes of acidosis.
❖ The initial dosage of sodium bicarbonate is 1 mEq/kg by IV push

6. Dopamine (Intropin)
Indication
• symptomatic hypotension in the absence of hypovolemia.
• It is the second line medication for symptomatic bradycardia (after 
atropine).  
Dosage
• Dopamine is administered by continuous IV infusion starting at 2 to 5 
mcg/kg/min, and the dose is titrated upward according to patient 
response.  
• A dilution of 400 to 800 mg of dopamine in 250 to 500-mL of D5W delivers 
1600 to 3200 mcg/mL.

Defibrillation
Defibrillation: It is the delivery of an electrical current to the heart through the
use of a defibrillator. The current can be delivered through the chest wall by use of
external paddles or adhesive electrode pads connected to cables.
All patients in an ICU are connected to a cardiac monitor that provides useful
information during a cardiopulmonary arrest. Once BLS procedures have been
initiated, further intervention may be necessary.
The nurse assesses the ECG rhythms on the monitor throughout the
resuscitation. If the patient is in VF or pulseless VT, preparations for defibrillation
need to be started immediately to avoid death.

The delivery of an electrical impulse by an external 
defibrillator simultaneously depolarizes most of the 
ventricular cells during VF and the reentry 
abnormalities of VT.
Following this first shock, five cycles of CPR should be 
performed. If the patient remains in a shockable rhythm 
then a second shock should be delivered. After each 
subsequent shock, five more cycles of CPR should be 
performed before assessing whether the patient has 
remained in a shockable rhythm.

Automated External Defibrillation (AED)
The AED is an external defibrillator with rhythm analysis capabilities.
It is used to achieve early defibrillation.

Cardioversion
Cardioversion is the delivery of a shock that is synchronized with the patient’s cardiac
rhythm. The purpose of Cardioversion is to disrupt an ectopic pacemaker that is
causing a dysrhythmia and to allow the sino atrial node to take control of the rhythm.
Cardioversion is similar to defibrillation, except the delivery of energy is
synchronized to occur during ventricular deporlization.

Care of the patient after Resuscitation
Post resuscitation goals include
1. Optimizing cardiopulmonary function and tissue perfusion,
2. Transporting the patient to an appropriate critical car unit capable of providing post
cardiac arrest care
3. Identifying and treating the precipitating causes of the arrest to help prevent another
arrest.

Management of post cardiac arrest
▪ Advanced airway placement
▪ Maintenance of blood pressure and oxygenation
▪ Control of dysrhythmias
▪ Advanced neurological monitoring
▪ Use of therapeutic hypothermia.

1. The unconscious patient will require an advanced airway or endotracheal intubation.
2. Continuous ECG monitoring continues after Return Of Spontaneous Circulation
(ROSC), during transport to the critical care unit
3. IV access is obtained if not already established and position and function of any IV catheter is verified
4. If the patient is hypotensive (systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg) fluid boluses of 1 to 2 liters normal
saline or lactated Ringer solution are considered.
5. Vasoactive medications including Dopamine (5 to 10 mcg/kg/min), norepinephrine (0.1 to 0.5 mcg kg/min) or
epinephrine (1 to 10 mcg/min) maybe initiated.
6. Serial neurological exams are performed, including response to verbal commands or physical stimulation,
pupillary response to light, presence of corneal reflex, spontaneous eye movement, gag, cough, and
spontaneous breaths.

❖ Intermittent or continuous IV sedation, analgesia, or both can be
used to relieve pain, discomfort, and anxiety.
❖ Serial head computed tomography (CT) scans and
electroencephalography (EEC) monitoring may be performed if the
patient is comatose and/or has seizures.
❖ Hyperglycemia may occurs post cardiac arrest. The optimum blood
glucose concentration and strategies are not known for patient post
cardiac arrest. However, a target range of 144 to 180 mg/dL has been
shown to decrease the risk of hyperglycemia after cardiac arrest.

❖ Emotional support is an important aspect of care after an arrest. Fear of
death or of a recurrence of the arrest is common.
❖Nurses should listen objectively and provide psychological support. In addition
to the patient, many other people are affected when a code occurs