Lung Injury
Prepared by:
Dr. Naglaa Nassar

Chest trauma
1. Rib fractures
The most common type of chest 
trauma usually involves the fifth 
through the ninth ribs.
Common Causes
• Occurs over 60% of patients 
admitted with chest trauma.

Manifestations
• Fractures of the first three ribs are rare but deadly due to 
laceration of the subclavian artery.
• Fractures of the lower ribs are associated with injury to the 
spleen and liver.
• Severe pain                           
•  Bruising
•  Tenderness
• Muscle spasm over the site of the fracture.
• A crackling grating sound in the thorax may be detected

Normal breathing cycle
• Normally the chest expands on 
inspiration, creating a negative 
intra thoracic pressure; on 
expiration the chest wall retracts 
in response to positive pressure 
inside the chest

Flail chest
• A severe complication of blunt chest trauma that 
occurs when three or more adjacent ribs fracture 
in two or more places (or the sternum is fractured, 
along with ribs adjacent to the sternum fracture). The 
fracture segment is free of the bony thorax and moves 
independently in response to intra thoracic pressure.

Paradoxic chest wall 
• Paradoxic chest wall motion is the hallmark 
symptom in diagnosing flail chest. Because a flail 
chest segment is no longer attached to the bony 
thorax, it follows the pressure and retracts on 
inspiration (negative pressure is a pulling pressure) 
and bulges on expiration (positive pressure is a 
pushing pressure).

Manifestations of Flail chest
➢ During inspiration, as the chest expands, the detached part of the rib segment 
(flail segment) will move in a paradoxical manner in that it is pulled inward 
during inspiration reducing the amount of air that can be taken into the lungs.  
➢ On expiration, the flail segment will bulge outward impairing the patient’s 
ability to exhale.  Lung contusion and atelectasis often accompany flail chest.

Assessment of chest trauma
Inspection:    RR >20 breaths min; hyperpnea; ventilatory distress; use of 
accessory   muscles  of  respiration;  nasal   flaring; decreased  tidal   volume; 
hemoptysis; asymmetric chest  wall motion;  paradoxic chest wall motion; 
inability to clear tracheobronchial secretions; splinting; jugular venous 
distention; cyanosis or pallor of the skin, lips, and nail beds; and ecchymosis, 
which can signal injury to underlying organs.

Cont, Assessment of chest trauma
Palpation: 
❑ Tracheal deviation;     - subcutaneous emphysema of the neck
❑ pper portion of the chest; tenderness at fracture points;                       - flail chest segment; 
❑ weak pulse;                                                                                                   - cool, clammy skin;
❑  protrusion of bony fragments.
Percussion: 
❖ Dullness over lung fields, which can signal hemothorax or atelectasis;
❖  Hyperresonance over lung fields, signaling pneumothorax.

Cont, Assessment of chest trauma
Auscultation: Diminished or absent breath sounds, respiratory stridor, bony 
crepitus over fracture sites, muffled heart tones, decreased BP, pericardial 
friction rub, paradoxic pulse, apical tachycardia. In addition, bowel sounds may 
be heard in the thorax as a result of rupture or tear of the diaphragm, allowing 
herniation of abdominal contents into the thorax.

Cont, Chest trauma
2. Penetrating  injury: Dyspnea, SOB, moderate  chest  pain, restlessness, 
anxiety.
3. Potential complications: Hemothorax, pneumothorax, tension pneumothorax, 
hemorrhage, shock, and infection.

Diagnostic tests
1. Chest x-ray: Confirms presence of air or fluid in the plcural space; 
assists in
• determining extent of hemothorax or pneumothorax; and confirms 
presence or absence of fractures of the bony thorax, as well as 
mediastinal shift.
2. ABG analysis: Evaluates adequacy of oxygenation and presence or 
absence of acid-base abnormalities. Typical results will reflect hypoxemia 
(Pao2 <80 mm Hg) and hypercapnia (Paco2 >45 mm Hg) with concomitant 
respiratory acidosis (pH <7.35).

Cont, diagnosis
3. Pulse oximetry: May be used for continuous monitoring of oxygen saturation.
4. ECG: Reveals presence or absence of life-threatening dysrhythmias and provides a more thorough 
analysis of the heart's electrical activity. Although dysrhythmias are a common complication after chest trauma, 
this important test often is overlooked.
5. White blood count: Baseline indicator of an infectious process.

Management of lung injury
1. Collaborative management: Interventions are directed 
toward managing acute respiratory compromise while correcting the 
underlying path physiology or injuries that complicate or aggravate the 
patient's condition. 
2. Oxygen therapy: Delivered by mask or cannula, depending on 
extent of hypoxemia. 
3. Intubation: Maintains patent airway, decreases airway resistance and 
respiratory effort, provides route for easy removal of airway secretions, and 
allows for manual or mechanical ventilation, as necessary.

Cont, managment
4. Mechanical ventilation: For cases of extreme respiratory distress or 
ventilator collapse
5. Blood replacement: Generally, blood loss is replaced with packed RBCs or 
whole fresh blood, when available. Volume usually is replaced with crystalloid 
fluids (e.g., normal saline, lactatcd Ringer's solution) rather than colloidal IV fluids 
(e.g., plasma, albumin) because colloids increase the risk of developing acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and renal failure. In addition, colloids are 
more expensive and research has failed to demonstrate a significant benefit.

Cont, managment
5. Chest tube insertion: To remove accumulation of fluid or air 
from the chest cavity. Placement depends on the location and extent 
of the hemothorax or pneumothorax and on principles of gravity 
drainage. 
6. Analgesia: Manages pain, which can interfere with work of 
breathing. Generally, opioid analgesics are avoided or used 
cautiously because of respiratory depressive side effects. Intercostal 
nerve block may be performed to provide local pain relief.

7. Stabilization and fixation of flail chest: Most flail chest 
injuries stabilize within 10-14 days without surgical 
intervention. 
8. Thoracotomy: Generally avoided unless complications 
develop after stabilization. Indications for thoracotomy include
massive air leak in a functioning drainage system, continued or
increased bleeding through a chest tube, refractory
hypotension, acute deterioration, and cardiac tamponade.

Nursing diagnoses and interventions
Risk for fluid volume deficit related to active loss secondary to excessive 
bleeding occurring with chest trauma
▪ Desired outcome: Patient is normovolemic as evidenced by BP and HR 
within patient's normal limits; stable weight; urine output >O.S ml/kg/h; chest 
drainage <100ml/h; and RR <20 breaths/min with normal depth and pattern .

Management of fluid volume deficit
➢Note condition of dressings and closed chest-drainage system at 
frequent intervals. Report excessive drainage or bleeding. Amounts 
>100 ml/h usually are considered excessive. 
➢Record accurate I&O status.
➢Assess VS at frequent intervals.

Cont, Management of fluid volume deficit
➢Fluid/Electrolyte Management : Assess patient's hydration status by 
monitoring daily weight, as well as amounts of fluid intake and urinary 
output. Monitor patient's Hgb as an indicator of hemostasis.
➢Airway management and oxygen therapy: For respiratory monitoring
➢Analgesic Administration: For pain management
➢ Bleeding Reduction: Blood Products Administration;

Lung injury
Key Terms
• Pneumothorax
• Hemothorax
• Cardiac Tamponade

1) Pneumothorax is an abnormal collection of air in the pleural space 
between the lung and the chest wall
2) Hemothorax is an accumulation of blood within the pleural cavity
3) Cardiac Tamponade is accumulation of fluid or blood in the 
pericardium sac around the heart that  resulting in compression of 
the heart.

Mechanism of Injury
. Blunt chest trauma results from sudden compression or positive 
pressure directed to the chest wall often by Motor Vehicle Accident 
(MV A) or falls.
• Penetrating trauma occurs when a foreign object penetrates the 
chest wall such as low-velocity weapons (gun, knife). Stab wounds 
that involve the anterior chest wall.

Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax occurs when the parietal or visceral 
pleura are breached and the pleural space is exposed to
positive atmospheric pressure. Normally the pressure in 
the pleural space is negative or sub atmospheric; this 
negative pressure is required to maintain lung inflation. 
When pleura are breached, air enters the pleural space, 
and the lung or a portion of it collapses.

Types of Pneumothorax
1. A simple or spontaneous pneumothorax: Occurs as air enters the 
pleural space through the rupture of a bleb or a bronchopleural fistula.
Causes: It may occur in an apparently healthy person in the absence of 
trauma due to rupture of an air filled bleb, or blister, on the surface of the 
lung, allowing air from the airways to enter the pleural cavity. It may be 
associated with diffuse interstitial lung disease and severe emphysema.

Cont, Types of Pneumothorax
2. A traumatic pneumothorax: Occurs when air escapes from a laceration 
in the lung itself and enters the pleural space or from a wound in the chest 
wall.
Causes: 
➢ Blunt trauma as rib fractures, penetrating chest 
➢ Abdominal trauma as stab wounds or gunshot wounds, or diaphragmatic 
tears. Traumatic pneumothorax may occur during invasive thoracic
procedures as thoracentesis and biopsy.

Cont, Types of Pneumothorax
3. Open pneumothorax is one form of traumatic pneumothorax. It occurs 
when a wound in the chest wall is large enough to allow air to pass freely 
in and out of the thoracic cavity with respiration that produces a sucking 
sound. Results not only the lung collapse, but the heart and great vessels 
also shift toward the uninjured side with each inspiration and in the 
opposite direction with expiration. This is termed mediastinal flutter, it 
produces serious circulatory problems.

Cont,Types of Pneumothorax
4. A tension pneumothorax: Occurs when air is drawn into the pleural 
space from a lacerated lung or through a small opening or wound in the 
chest wall. Air flows into the pleural space with inspiration and becomes 
trapped, it cannot be expelled during expiration through the air passages or 
the opening in the chest wall. In effect, a one-way valve mechanism occurs
where air enters the pleural space but cannot escape.

Tension pneumothorax
With each breath, tension (positive pressure) is increased within the affected pleural 
space. This causes the lung to collapse and the heart, the great vessels, and the trachea to 
shift toward the unaffected side of the chest (mediastinal shift to the opposite side).
As pressure continues to build, the shift exerts pressure on the heart and thoracic aorta, 
which results in decreased venous return and decreased cardiac output. Tissue perfusion 
with oxygenated blood is further impaired because the collapsed lung cannot participate in 
gas exchange.
Impairment of peripheral circulation and the pulse may be undetectable this is known as 
pulseless electrical activity.

Clinical Manifestations
➢ Pleuritic pain is usually sudden. 
➢ The patient may have only minimal respiratory distress with slight chest discomfort 
➢ Tachypnea 
➢ Small simple or uncomplicated pneumothorax. 
➢ If the pneumothorax is large and the lung collapses totally, acute respiratory distress 
occurs. The patient is anxious, has dyspnea and air hunger, has increased use of the 
accessory muscles, and may develop central cyanosis from severe hypoxemia

Cont, Manifestations
➢ In simple pneumothorax
➢  Trachea is midline
➢  Expansion of the chest is decreased
➢  Breath sounds may be diminished
➢  Percussion of the chest may reveal normal sounds or hyperresonance 
depending on the size of the pneumothorax.

Cont, Manifestations
➢ In tension pneumothorax 
➢ Air hunger, agitation, increasing hypoxemia, central cyanosis, 
hypotension, tachycardia, and profuse diaphoresis.
➢ The trachea is shifted away from the affected side
➢  Chest expansion may be decreased or fixed in a hyperexpansion state
➢ Breath sounds are diminished or absent, and percussion to the affected 
side is hyperresonant.

Medical Management
1. The goal of treatment is to evacuate the air or blood from the pleural
space. 
2. A small chest tube is inserted near the second intercostal space. 
3. If a patient also has a hemothorax, a large diameter chest tube is 
inserted, usually in the fourth or fifth intercostal space at the midaxillary 
line.

4. Once the chest tube is inserted and suction is applied (usually 
to 20 mm Hg suction), effective decompression of the pleural 
cavity (drainage of blood or air) occurs.
5.The pleural cavity can be decompressed by needle aspiration
(thoracentesis) or by chest tube drainage of the blood or air.

6. The chest wall is opened surgically (thoracotomy) if more than 1500 
mL of blood is aspirated initially by thoracentesis or if the initial chest 
tube output or if chest tube output continues at greater than 200 mL/h.

• The patient with a possible tension pneumothorax 
1. Should immediately be given a high concentration of supplemental
oxygen to treat the hypoxemia
2. Pulse oximetry should be used to monitor oxygen saturation.

In an emergency situation
 1. Inserting a large bore needle (14- gauge) at the second intercostal 
space, midclavicular line on the affected side for converting a tension 
pneumothorax to a simple pneumothorax.
2. If the lung re-expands and air leakage from the lung parenchyma 
stops
3. If a prolonged air leak continues from chest tube drainage to 
underwater seal, surgery may be necessary to close the leak.

Guidelines for Chest Tube Drainage Systems
1. If using a chest drainage system with a water seal, fill the water 
seal chamber with sterile water to the level specified by the 
manufacturer.
2. When using suction in chest drainage systems with a water seal, 
fill the suction control chamber with sterile water to the 20-
cm level or as prescribed. In systems without a water seal, set 
the regulator dial at the appropriate suction level.