Prepared by
Assist professor Dr : Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outlines 
o Introduction  
o Definition
o Indications of Mechanical Ventilation
o Common ventilator settings/parameters/controls
o Classification of Ventilators
o Complications of Positive Pressure Ventilation )PPV(

Introduction 
• Mechanical ventilation is a medical process
using a ventilator to help a patient breathe
when they are unable to do so adequately on
their own. The machine assists with moving
air into and out of the lungs, delivering
oxygen and removing carbon dioxide, It is
used in cases of respiratory failure and can
involve invasive methods like a breathing
tube or noninvasive methods like a face
mask.

Definition 
Mechanical Ventilator is a
positive or negative
pressure breathing device
that can maintain
ventilation and oxygen
delivery for a prolonged
period(Artificial lung).

Indications of Mechanical Ventilation
• Apnea : absence of breathing(e.g., neuromuscular or cardiopulmonary
collapse)
• Acute ventilatory failure, which is generally defined as a pH of less
than or equal to 7.25 with (PaCO2) greater than or equal to 50 mm Hg.
• Severe hypoxemia: (PaO2) of less than or equal to 50 mm Hg on room
air indicates a critical level of oxygen in the blood.
• Respiratory muscle fatigue: The muscles of respiration can become
fatigued e.g., chronic lung disease are examples COPD.

Common ventilator settings/parameters/controls
Tidal Volume (Vt): Is the volume of gas delivered to a patient during a 
ventilator breath? i.e. the amount of air inspired and expired with each 
breath.
(Usual volume selected is between 5 to 8 ml/kg body weight)
Respiratory Rate (f): Is the number of breaths the ventilator will 
deliver/minute (12-20 b/m). 
Minute Volume(MV): Is the volume of  the air in one minute (VT x f)

Common ventilator settings/parameters/controls
Positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) Positive pressure applied at 
the end of expiration of ventilator breaths expiration to maintain alveolar 
recruitment during mandatory breath. Usual setting 5: 10cm H2O 
Pressure support (PS) preset pressure delivered by ventilator to assess 
spontaneous breath. Usual setting: 10-15cm H2O

Common ventilator settings/parameters/controls
Fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2): The percent of oxygen 
concentration that the patient is receiving from the ventilator. 
(Between 21% &100% (usual amount 40-60%.
I:E Ratio (inspiration to expiration ratio): Is the ratio of 
inspiratory time to expiratory to expiratory time during breath 
(Usually (1:2)

Common ventilator settings/parameters/controls
Humidification and Airway temperature
Humidifier temperatures should be kept close to body temperature 35°C-37°C.
Decreased humidity will cause dried secretions and plugging.
The humidifier should be checked for adequate water levels.
Humidifier should not be overfilled as this may increase circuit resistance and 
interfere with spontaneous breathing..

Classification of Ventilators
Ventilators are categorized as either 
•Negative pressure
•Positive pressure.

Negative Pressure Ventilators 
o Negative-pressure ventilators exert a negative 
pressure on the external chest. 
o Decreasing the intrathoracic pressure during 
inspiration allows air to flow into the lung. 
Physiologically, this type of assisted ventilation 
is similar to spontaneous ventilation.

Negative Pressure Ventilators 
o It is used in chronic respiratory failure associated
with neuromuscular conditions, such as poliomyelitis,
muscular dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis.
o Negative- pressure ventilators do not require
intubation of the airway.
o There are several types of negative pressure
ventilators: iron lungs, and chest cuirass.

Positive Pressure Ventilation
o Positive-pressure ventilators
inflate the lungs by exerting
positive pressure on the
airway, pushing air in, forcing
the alveoli to expand during
inspiration. Expiration occurs
passively.

Positive Pressure Ventilation
1- Invasive Mechanical Ventilation:
Endotracheal intubation or
tracheostomy is usually necessary for
Positive-pressure ventilators.
2- Noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation does not require
intubation.

Positive-pressure modes of ventilation
have traditionally been categorized into
o Volume ventilation 
o Pressure ventilation 
.

Volume Ventilation 
o V olumeventilation has traditionally been the most popular form of PPV ,
largely because Tidal Volume (Vt) and Minute Ventilation (MV) are
ensured, which is an essential goal in the patient with acute illness.
o The preset volume of air delivered with each inspiration. Once this preset
volume is delivered to the patient, the ventilator cycles off and exhalation
occurs passively.
o A preset Vt is delivered with each breath regardless of resistance and
compliance. Tidal V olumeis stable from breath to breath, but airway pressure
may vary.

Volume Modes
1. Control Ventilation (CV) or Controlled Mandatory Ventilation
(CMV)
2. Assist/Control (A/C) or Assisted Mandatory Ventilation (AMV
3. Synchronized Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation (SIMV)

Volume Modes 
o Control Ventilation (CV) or Controlled Mandatory
Ventilation (CMV)
With this mode, the ventilator provides all the
patient’s minute ventilation. The clinician sets the
respiratory rate, Vt, inspiratory time, and positive
End Expiratory Pressure (PEEP).

Volume Modes 
o Assist/Control (A/C) or
Assisted Mandatory
Ventilation (AMV) When
the patient initiates a
spontaneous breath. The
ventilator sensitivity also is
set, and a full-volume breath
is delivered. This option
requires that a rate, Vt,
inspiratory time, and PEEP
be set for the patient.

Volume Modes 
o Synchronized Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation (SIMV)
This mode requires that rate, Vt, inspiratory time, sensitivity,
and PEEP are set by the clinician. In between mandatory
breaths, patients can spontaneously breathe at their own rates and
Vt. With SIMV ,the ventilator synchronizes the mandatory breaths
with the patient’s own inspirations.

Synchronized Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation (SIMV)

Pressure Ventilation 
oThe clinician selects the desired pressure
level and the Vt is determined by the
selected pressure level, resistance, and
compliance.

Types Pressure mode
1. Pressure Support Ventilation (PSV)
2. Pressure-Controlled/Inverse Ratio Ventilation (PC/IRV)
3. Non-invasive Bilateral Positive-Pressure Ventilation
Mode) BiPAP)
4. Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)

Pressure Modes
1- Pressure-Controlled
• Which delivers a preset pressure for a set time
2- Pressure Support Ventilation (PSV)
• Patient initiates each breath
• Ventilator assists with a fixed pressure level
• Patient controls rate, timing, and tidal volume
It's commonly used for:
• Weaning from mechanical ventilation
• Providing comfort while maintaining some ventilatory assistance

Non-invasive Bilateral Positive-Pressure Ventilation Mode 
• is a noninvasive form of mechanical ventilation provided by
means of a nasal mask, nasal prongs, or a full face mask.
• It is used in the treatment of patients with chronic respiratory
insufficiency to manage acute or chronic respiratory failure
without intubation.
• The system allows the clinician to select two levels of
positive-pressure support: an inspiratory pressure support
level (referred to as IPAP) and an expiratory pressure called
EPAP (PEEP/CPAPlevel).

• BiPAP is beneficial in patients with worsening
hypoventilation, obstructive apneic episodes, or both.
• It is also useful to prevent intubation in patients with
respiratory failure and hypercarbia as well as to prevent
reintubation following extubation in borderline cases.
• Use of a full face mask may increase the risk for
aspiration and risk for re-breathing carbon dioxide;
therefore, ventilation with a full face mask should be
used cautiously.
• Thick or profuse secretions and poor cough may be
relative contraindications for BiPAP.

Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)  
• Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) provides
positive pressure to the airways throughout the
respiratory cycle.
• CPAP assists spontaneously breathing patients to
improve their oxygenation by elevating the end-
expiratory pressure in the lungs keeping the upper airway
and trachea open throughout the respiratory cycle.
• CPAP can be used for intubated and non-intubated
patients.
To use CPAP, the patient must be breathing independently.

Ventilator Alarms
Pressure Alarms
o High-pressure alarms : causes for alarm activation include secretions,
condensate in the tubing, biting on the endotracheal tubing, increased
resistance (i.e., bronchospasm), decreased compliance (e.g., pulmonary
edema, pneumothorax), and tubing compression.
o Low-pressure alarms are used to sense disconnection, circuit leaks, and
changing compliance and resistance.

Alarm silence or pause
• Options are built in by ventilator manufacturers so that 
clinicians can temporarily silence alarms for short 
periods (i.e., 20 seconds) because alarms must stay 
activated at all times.

Complications of Positive Pressure Ventilation)PPV(
1. Ventilator induced lung Injury
Ventilator can cause two types of lung injury:
A) Air leaks
B) Biotrauma

Air leaks related to ventilator are the result of
❑ Volutrauma (excessive volume in the alveoli)
❑ Barotrauma (excessive pressure in the alveoli)
❑ Atelectrauma (Shearing of the alveoli due to repeated
opening and closing of the alveoli
Ventilator induced lung Injury

▪ Volutrauma, barotrauma, and atelectrauma can lead to excessive 
alveolar wall stress and damage to the alveolar –capillary membrane, 
resulting in air leakage into surrounding spaces.  
▪ The air then travels out through the hilum and into the mediastinum 
(pneumomediastinum), pleural space (pneumothorax), pericardium 
(pneumopericardium), peritoneum (pneumoperitoneum), and subcutaneous 
tissue (subcutaneous emphysema).  
V olutrauma, barotrauma, and atelectrauma can cause the release of cellular mediators 
and initiation of inflammatory- immune response which is known as

Biotrauma.  
▪ Biotrauma can result in to the development of ARDS. 
▪ ARDS is a life-threatening condition that occurs when there is 
severe fluid buildup in both lungs. The fluid buildup prevents the 
lungs from working properly which inhibit the transfer of oxygen 
from air into the body and carbon dioxide out of the body into the 
air