Myocardial Infarction
Prepared by 
Dr / Ghada Elsayed

Out line 
Definition Etiology Pathophysiology Types 
Risk factors Signs and 
symptoms Diagnostic test Management of 
MI

Pre test 
Mention risk 
factors of MI
Mention clinical 
manifestation 
of MI

Definition:
• MI is the term used to describe an
irreversible cellular loss and
myocardial necrosis (cell death)
secondary to an abrupt decrease or
total cessation of coronary blood flow
to a specific area of the myocardium.

• Etiology:
• Atherosclerosis is responsible for majority of MI 
because it cause luminal narrowing and reduced 
blood flow, resulting in decreased oxygen delivery 
to the myocardium.
• There are three mechanisms that can block the 
coronary artery and responsible for the acute 
reduction of oxygen delivery to myocardial:
• Plaque rupture
• New coronary artery thrombosis
• Coronary artery spasms to the rupture plaque

Pathophysiology:
• Ischemia:
• The outer region of the infracted myocardial 
area is the zone of ischemia or It is 
composed of viable cells.
• Injury:
• The infarcted zone is surrounded by injured 
but still potentially viable tissues in an area 
known as the zone of injury. 
• This recorded on ECG as elevation of the (ST 
segment).

:
Infarction
The area of dead and muscle 
(necrosis) in the myocardium is 
known as the zone of infarction. 
On the ECG, evidence of this zone is 
seen as new pathologic Q waves, 
which reflect a lack of 
depolarization from cardiac surface

Classification of infarctions:
1- A transmural infarctions:
• Involves all three muscle layers, the endocardium, the 
myocardium and the epicardium and result in full 
thickness necrosis, have a higher incidence of LV 
dysfunction. 
• ECG demonstrates alteration in both myocardium 
depolarization and repolarization (ST segment). The 
change in depolarization is represented a new Q wave

2- Non-transmural infarction:
Classified into subendocardial (involve the 
endocardium and myocardium) or subepicardial 
(involve the myocardium and epicardium). 
ECG change in subendocardial ischemia is ST 
depression, abnormal Q wave not seen and R 
wave progression is normal

Myocardial Infarction Location:
Anterior Wall Infarction: 
Anterior wall infarction results from occlusion of the proximal left anterior 
descending artery.
ST segment elevation is expected in leads V1 through V4 on the ECG.
If the left main coronary artery is occluded, the ECG manifestation will involve 
almost all of the chest leads V1 through V6 and leads I and aVL.

Left Lateral 
Wall Infarction: 
• Left lateral wall infarction occurs as a result 
of occlusion of the circumflex coronary 
artery.
• On ECG, new Q waves and ST segment and T 
wave changes are seen in lead I, aVL, V5 and 
V6. 
• Patients present with only lateral wall ECG 
changes, and some anterior wall leads (V3 
and V4) may show evidence of injury or 
infarction.

Inferior Wall Infarction:
Inferior wall infarction occurs with occlusion of the right coronary 
artery.
This infarction manifested by ECG changes in leads II, III and aVF.
Conduction disturbances are expected with an inferior wall MI and 
are related to the anatomy of the coronary artery supply.

Right Ventricular infarction: 
• Infarction in right ventricular occurs when a 
blockage occurs in a proximal section of the 
right coronary artery. 
• 10% to 15% show the hemodynamic 
abnormalities associated with classic 
infarction of the right ventricle.
• It is important to write R on the ECG (V1R 
and V6R) in the front of the recorder right 
ventricular chest leads to ensure that the lead 
location is clear.

Posterior Wall Infarction: 
Infarction of posterior wall can occur because of a blockage in the right 
coronary artery or in the circumflex artery. 
This occurs because both arteries supply this section of the heart, although 
the right coronary artery is generally the dominant vessel. A posterior wall 
MI is difficult to detect but may be identified by specific leads V1 and V2.

Non- ST segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction:
The ECG was considered the gold standard when diagnosis acute MI.
One reason for the lack of ST segment elevation may be that the infarction 
and subsequent necrosis are not full –thickness lesions.
Because some of the muscle in the area can still be depolarized, ST segment 
elevation may not occur.
This situation is diagnosed as NSTEMI.

Risk factors
Age.
• Men age 45 and older and women age 55 
and older are more risk to have a heart 
attack than are younger men and women.
Tobacco use.
• This includes smoking and long-term 
exposure to smoke that lead to 
atherosclerosis and plunge obstruction.
High blood pressure.
• Over time, high blood pressure can damage 
arteries that lead to atherosclerosis and 
plunge obstruction.

High cholesterol or triglycerides.
A high level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is most 
likely to narrow arteries also increases heart attack risk.
Obesity.
Obesity is linked with high blood pressure, diabetes, high levels of 
triglycerides and bad cholesterol, and low levels of good cholesterol 
narrow arteries also increases heart attack risk.
Diabetes.
High blood sugar increases the risk of a heart attack.
Risk factors

Unhealthy diet.
A diet high in sugars, animal fats, 
processed foods, trans fats and salt 
increases the risk of heart attacks.
Stress.
Emotional stress, such as 
extreme anger, may increase 
the risk of a heart attack.
Risk factors

Clinical Manifestation 
of MI
Chest pain is sever, crushing, tight, squeezing or feeling of 
pressure
It can be precordial, substernal, or in the back, radiating to 
arms, neck or jaw, unrelated to exertion and respiration
The skin may be cool, clammy, pale and diaphoretic, the 
colour may be dusky and hyperthermia may be present
The patient may be short of breath, dyspnoea, and 
tachypnoea, or feel faint
Hypotension, dysrhythmia, as PVC, bradycardia or 
tachycardia or heart blocking with varying degree
Anxious or restless or nausea and vomiting

Diagnosis of MI
• ECG Change in MI include:
• Inverted T waves
• ST Segment elevation
• Pathologic Q waves

Cardiac 
Markers
• Creatine kinase (CK)
• Is an enzyme that is found in heart muscle, skeletal 
muscle, and brain tissue.
• CK values start rising 4 to 6 hours after the onset of 
myocardial necrosis, typically peak at 18 to 24 
hours, and return to baseline at 36 to 40 hours.
• To rule out an MI, blood samples may be drawn 
every 8 hours for 24 hours.

CK-MB
• CK-MB in amounts greater than 5% of total CK generally is considered diagnostic for  
myocardial damage in the presence of chest pain or other symptoms believed to  
represent myocardial ischemia.
• Negative values 10 to 12 hours after the onset of pain indicate the absence of myocardial 
necrosis.
• Patients who present more than 24 hours after the onset of symptoms may not benefit from 
measurement of CK isoenzymes because the levels already may have returned to normal
• Treponins:
• Troponins are cardiac proteins that are released into the circulation after necrosis and rupture of 
myocardial cells. 
• Three subforms have been identified: cardiac troponin-I (cTnI), troponin-T (cTnT), and 
troponin-C (cTnC).

Complication of Acute MI: 
• The complication may result from electrical dysfunction or 
from a cardiac contractility problem.
• Electrical dysfunctions include:
• Bradycardia
• Bundle branch blocks
• Varying degree of heart block
• Pumping complications causes:
• Congestive Heart failure 
• Pulmonary edema
• Cardiogenic shock

Electrical dysfunctions
• Sinus Bradycardia:
•  Sinus bradycardia occur in 40% of all 
patients with acute MI.
•  It is more prevalent with an Inferior wall 
MI.
•  Sinus bradycardia is most frequently 
seen in the immediate post infraction 
period.
•  Symptomatic bradycardia with 
hypotension and low cardiac output is 
treated with Atropine
• 0.5 mg to 1.0 mg IV push, repeated every 
3 to 5 minutes to a maximum dose of
• 0.03 mg per kg (2 mg for a person who 
weight 70 kg).

Sinus Tachycardia: 
Sinus tachycardia most often occurs with Anterior wall MI. 
Anterior infarction impairs left ventricular pumping ability thereby reducing 
ejection fraction and decreasing stroke volume.
In attempt to maintain Cardiac Output, the heart rate increases. Tachycardia 
must be corrected because shorten diastolic filling time, thereby decreasing 
stroke volume, systemic perfusion, and coronary artery filling

Treatment of Sinus Tachycardia:
• If ventricular rate is greater than 150 BPM , Prepare for immediate cardioversion
• If ventricular rate is less than 150 BPM, Give Lidocaine 1.0-1.5 mg/kg IV push and repeat 
every 5-10 min. 
• Additional doses of 0.5-0.75 mg/kg IV push are given until a maximum total dose of 3 
mg/kg

•Premature ventricular contractions
•Within the first few hours after MI almost all 
patients' ’ill have Premature Ventricular 
Contractions (PVCs).
•PVCs and VT occurring early within the few first 
hours and should be treated if it is frequent (more 
than 6 per minute, closely coupled or multiform 
shape)
•PVCs are controlled by:
•Administering oxygen to reduce myocardial 
hypoxia,
•Correcting acid-base or electrolyte imbalances
•Administering an IV Lidocaine bolus and 
infusion

• AV Heart Block during MI:
•  Av heart block most frequently following an inferior wall MI.
•  Because the Right Coronary Artery (RCA) perfuses the A V node in 
90% of the population, occlusion of RCA leads to ischemia and 
infarction of the A V node cells.
•  Patients have A V block with hemodynamic compromise is treated by 
insertion of a transvenous temporary pacemake.

Pumping complications
Ventricular aneurysm after myocardial infarction: A left ventricular aneurysm is a non 
contractile, thinned left ventricular wall that results from an acute transmural infarction. 
This complication occurs in less than 5% of patients after acute MI.
Ventricular septal rupture after MI: Post-infarction rupture of the septal wall is rare but 
potentially lethal complication of acute anterior wall MI. 
This rare complication generally occurs in the first 24 hours after an acute MI.

Acute mitral regurgitation after 
MI: 
Papillary muscle rupture can occur when the infarct involve 
the area around one of the papillary muscles results 
ineffective mitral valve closure, and blood is forced back 
into the low pressure left atrium during ventricular systole. 
Cardiac wall rupture after MI: 
The incidence of cardiac wall rupture has two peak times. 
The first occur within the first 24 hours and the second 
between the third and fifth post-infarction day when 
scavenger cell are removing necrotic debris, thinning the 
myocardial wall.

• Pericarditis after MI:
•  Pericarditis is inflammation of the 
pericardial sac. 
• It can occur during or after an acute MI. 
Pain is the most common symptoms of 
pericarditis and pericardial friction rub is 
the most common initial sign.
• Heart failure after MI: 
• Many patients with acute STEMI have 
heart failure on admission.

Management of MI
• Recanalization of the Coronary Artery
• Fibrinolytic Therapy
• Anticoagulantion therapy
• Prevention of Ventricular Remolding
• The nurse assesses the patient’s vital signs and mental status frequently.
• The patient is placed on a cardiac monitor for ischemia and dysrhythmia 
detection.
• The patient is placed on bed rest until stabilized to minimize oxygen demands.
• Supplemental oxygen may be given to unstable patients to increase oxygen 
supply.
• A pulse oximeter and arterial blood gases are used to evaluate oxygenation 
status.

Pain control
Pain control is a priority because 
continued pain is a symptom of ongoing 
ischemia, which increases the risk on 
non-infarcted myocardial tissue.
Morphine is the analgesic of choice; it 
decreases anxiety, restlessness, 
autonomic nervous system activity, and 
preload, thereby decreasing myocardial 
oxygen demands

Administer 
Nitroglycerin
Fibrinolytic 
Therapy 
 Anticoagulant therapy 
Streptokinase 
is given 1.5 
million U over 
one hour 
infusion. 
The fibrinolytic 
therapy is used 
in combination 
with 
anticoagulants 
(Heparin) and 
antiplatelet 
agent (aspirin).
IV heparin and 
oral aspirin are 
prescribed 
during or 
immediately 
after 
thrombolytic 
therapy.

Criteria for 
Fibrinolytic 
Therapy
• No more than 6 hours from the onset of chest 
pain
• ST-Segment elevation on ECG or new-onset of 
left bundle branch block
• Ischemic chest pain of 30 minutes duration
• Chest pain unresponsive to SL Nitroglycerine
• Must check no conditions that might cause 
hemorrhage