Pulmonary Embolism (PE)
Prepared by
Assist professor Dr/Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outlines
❖ Anatomy of pulmonary arteries
❖ Description
❖ Etiology
❖ Pathophysiology
❖ Assessment and Diagnosis
❖ Medical Management
❖ Nursing Intervention

•Main pulmonary artery (Pulmonary trunk): A short, 
wide vessel that originates from the right ventricle of the 
heart. It is one of the "great vessels" of the heart, along 
with the aorta.
•Right and left pulmonary arteries: The main pulmonary 
artery divides into these two branches beneath the aortic 
arch. The right pulmonary artery carries blood to the right 
lung, and the left pulmonary artery carries blood to the left 
lung.
Anatomy of pulmonary arteries

Anatomy of pulmonary arteries
•Smaller branches: Upon entering the 
lungs, the main arteries split further into 
lobar arteries, then into segmental, 
subsegmental, and finally, into tiny 
arterioles.
•Capillary network: The arterioles 
terminate in capillary beds that surround the 
alveoli, which is where gas exchange takes 
place.

Description
A pulmonary embolism (PE) occurs when a clot 
(thrombotic embolus) or other matter (non thrombotic 
embolus) lodges in the pulmonary arterial system, 
disrupting the blood flow to the lungs. The majority of 
thrombotic emboli arise from the deep leg veins, 
particularly the iliac, femoral, and popliteal veins . 
Other sources include the right ventricle, the upper 
extremities, and the pelvic veins. Non-thrombotic 
emboli arise from fat, tumors, amniotic fluid, air, and 
foreign bodies.

Etiology
A number of predisposing factors 
and precipitating conditions put a patient 
at risk for developing a pulmonary 
embolism. 
Three main predisposing factors 
❑ Hypercoagulability, 
❑ Injury to vascular endothelium
❑  Venous stasis (Virchow's triad)

• Causes of the venous stasis.
• Atrial fibrillation
• Immobility
• Injury to vascular endothelium
• Local vessel injury
• Atherosclerosis
• Hypercoagulability
• Polycythemia

Precipitating Conditions
• Previous pulmonary embolus
• Cardiovascular disease
• Heart failure
• Cardiomyopathy
• Cor pulmonale
• Surgery
➢Orthopedic 
➢Vascular 
➢Abdominal

Precipitating Conditions
Cancer
❖ Ovarian
❖ Pancreatic
❖ Stomach

Precipitating Conditions
• Extrahepatic bile duct system
• Trauma (injury or burns)
▪ Lower extremities 
▪ Pelvis
▪ Hip
• Gynecologic status 
• Pregnancy
•  Postpartum
• Birth control pills

Pathophysiology
 A massive PE occurs with the blockage of a 
lobar or larger artery, resulting in occlusion of 
more than 40% of the pulmonary vascular bed. 
Blockage of the pulmonary arterial system has 
both pulmonary and hemodynamic 
consequences.

The effects on the pulmonary system are
❑ Increased alveolar dead space
❑ Bronchoconstriction, 
❑ Compensatory shunting.
❑ The hemodynamic effects include
❑  An increase in pulmonary vascular resistance 
❑ Right ventricular workload

Increased Dead Space
1. An increase in alveolar dead space occurs 
because an area of the lung is receiving 
ventilation without being perfused .
2.  The ventilation to this area is known as wasted 
ventilation, because it does not participate in gas 
exchange. 
3. This effect leads to alveolar dead space 
ventilation and an increase in the work of 
breathing to limit the amount of dead space 
ventilation, localized bronchoconstriction occurs.

Bronchoconstriction
Bronchoconstriction develops as a result of alveolar 
hypocarbia, hypoxia, and the release of mediators. 
1. Alveolar hypocarbia occurs as a consequence of 
➢ Decreased carbon dioxide in the affected area 
and leads to constriction of the local airways
➢ Increased airway resistance
➢ Redistribution of ventilation to perfused areas of 
the lungs. 
2- A variety of mediators are released from the site of 
the injury, either from the clot or the surrounding lung 
tissue, which further causes constriction of the 
airways. Bronchoconstriction promotes the 
development of atelectasis.

Compensatory Shunting
1. Compensatory shunting occurs as a result of the 
unaffected areas of the lungs having to 
accommodate the entire Cardiac Output. 
2. This creates a situation in which perfusion exceeds 
ventilation and blood is returned to the left side of 
the heart without participating in gas exchange. This 
leads to the development of hypoxemia

Hemodynamic Consequences
The major hemodynamic consequence of a PE is the development of 
pulmonary hypertension, which is part of the effect of a mechanical obstruction 
when more than 50% of the vascular bed is occluded. 
➢ In addition, the mediators released at the injury site and the development of 
hypoxia cause pulmonary vasoconstriction, which further exacerbates 
pulmonary hypertension.
➢  As the pulmonary vascular resistance increases, so does the workload of the 
right ventricle as reflected by a rise in pulmonary artery (PA) pressures. 
➢ Consequently, right ventricular failure occurs, which can lead to decreases in 
left ventricular preload, CO, and blood pressure, and shock.

Assessment and Diagnosis
The patient with a PE may have any number of presenting 
signs and symptoms
-Tachycardia and tachypnea 
- Dyspnea                              - Apprehension
-Fever                                   -Crackles
-Pleuritic chest pain             - Cough
-Hemoptysis       -Syncope and hemodynamic instability can occur as a result 
of right ventricular failure.

Initial laboratory studies and diagnostic procedures:
oABG analysis 
oD-dimer
• Fibrinogen  breakdown in 
the blood
oElectrocardiogram (EGG)
oChest radiography, and Echocardiography (ECHO)

ABGs may show
•A low Pao2, indicating hypoxemia  
• A low Paco2, indicating hypocarbia
•  A high pH, indicating a respiratory alkalosis
•  The hypocarbia with resulting respiratory 
alkalosis is caused by tachypnea.

EGG interpretation PE 
The most frequent EGG finding seen in 
the patient with a PE is sinus tachycardia. 
The classic ECG pattern associated with a 
PE :inverted T wave
Other ECG findings associated with a PE 
include right bundle branch block, new-
onset atrial fibrillation.

Assessment and Diagnosis
-Chest x-Ray findingsAbnormal findings include 
❖ Cardiomegaly
❖ Pleural effusion
❖ Elevated hemidiaphragm
❖ Enlargement of the right descending pulmonary artery 
(Palla's sign) a wedge-shaped density above the 
diaphragm (Hampton's hump) and the presence of 
atelectasis.
-

Assessment and Diagnosis
An ECHO, either transthoracic or 
transesophageal, is also useful in the 
identification of a PE, because it can 
provide visualization of any emboli 
in the central pulmonary arteries

Medical Management
Medical management of the patient with PE 
involves 
➢Prevention strategies.
➢ Treatment strategies.

Medical Management
Preventive strategies include: 
❖  Use of prophylactic anticoagulation 
with low-dose or adjusted-dose heparin, 
LMWH, or oral anticoagulants.
❖ Use of pneumatic compression has also 
been demonstrated as effective methods 
of prophylaxis in low-risk patients.

Medical Management
Treatment strategies Include
❑Preventing the recurrence of PE
❑Facilitating clot dissolution
❑Reversing the effects of pulmonary hypertension
❑ Promoting gas exchange 
❑ Preventing complications.

Prevention of Recurrence
1. Administration of unfractionated or LMWH 
and warfarin (Coumadin). 
• Warfarin should be started at the same time 
and when the international normalized ratio 
(INR) reaches 3.0, the heparin should be 
discontinued.
• The patient should remain on warfarin for 3 to 
12 months, depending on his or her risk for 
thromboemobolic disease.

Prevention of Recurrence
1. Heparin is administered to prevent further clots from 
forming and has no effect on the existing clot. 
2. The INR should be maintained between 2.0 and 3.0 .
3.  Interruption of the inferior vena cava is reserved for 
patients in whom anticoagulation is contraindicated. 
The procedure involves placement of a 
percutaneous venous filter (e.g., Green-field filter) 
into the vena cava, usually below the renal 
arteries. The filter prevents further thrombotic emboli 
from migrating into the lungs

Clot Dissolution
1. The administration of fibrinolytic agents in the 
treatment of PE has had limited success.
2.  Currently, fibrinolytic therapy is reserved for the 
patient with a massive PE and concomitant 
hemodynamic instability. Either recombinant 
tissue –type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) or 
streptokinase may be used. 
3. If the fibrinolytic therapy is contraindicated, 
pulmonary embolectomy may be performed to 
remove clot.

Reversal of Pulmonary Hypertension
1. Administration of inotropic agents and fluid, fluids should 
be administered to increase right ventricular preload, which 
would stretch the right ventricle and increase contractility, 
2. Thus overcoming the elevated pulmonary arterial pressure. 
Inotropic agents also can be used to increase contractility to 
facilitate an increase in CO.

Nursing Management
Nursing actions are aimed 
❖ preventing the development of DVT which is a major complication of 
immobility and a leading cause of PE. These measures include
➢ Active/passive range-of-motion exercises involving foot extension
➢ Use of pneumatic compression devices
➢ Adequate hydration
➢ Progressive ambulation.

Nursing interventions
✓ Optimizing oxygenation and ventilation, 
✓ Monitoring for bleeding
✓ Providing comfort 
✓ Emotional support
✓ Maintaining surveillance for complications
✓ Educating the patient and family.

Optimizing Oxygenation and Ventilation
❖  Positioning
❖ Preventing desaturation
❖ Promoting secretion clearance.

Monitoring for Bleeding
o The patient receiving anticoagulant or fibrinolytic 
therapy should be observed for signs of bleeding. 
o The patient's gums, skin, urine, stool, and emesis 
should be screened for signs of overt or covert bleeding.
o In addition, monitoring the patient’s INR or a PTT is 
critical to managing the anticoagulation therapy

Educating the Patient and Family
❑ Early in the patient's hospital stay, the patient and family should be 
taught about pulmonary embolus, its etiologies, and its treatment.As the 
patient moves toward discharge
❑ Teaching should focus on the interventions necessary for preventing 
the reoccurrence of DVT and subsequent emboli; signs and symptoms 
of DVT and anticoagulant complications and measures to prevent 
bleeding. 
❑ If the patient smokes, he or she should be encouraged to stop smoking 
and be referred to smoking cessation program

Measures to prevent deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
- Avoid tight-fitting clothes, crossing legs, and 
prolonged sitting or standing, elevate legs when 
sitting, exercise.
- Signs and symptoms of DVT (e.g., redness, swelling, 
sharp or deep leg pain)
- importance of taking medications
- Signs and symptoms: of anticoagulant complications 
(e.g , excessive bruising: discoloration of the skin, 
changes in color of urine or stools
- Measurement to prevent bleeding (e.g., use soft bristle 
toothbrush, caution when shaving.

Collaborative Management
1. Administer oxygen therapy .
2. Intubate patient .
3. Initiate mechanical ventilation.
4. Administer medications :
▪ Fibrinolytic therapy Anticoagulants 
▪ Bronchodilators 
▪ Inotropic agents 
▪ Sedatives Analgesics

Collaborative Management
5- Administer fluids
6-Position patient to optimize ventilation/perfusion matching
8-Maintain surveillance for complications : 
➢ Bleeding
➢ Acute respiratory distress syndrome
9- Provide comfort and emotional support