Respiratory Failure
prepared by 
Dr/ Naglaa Nassar

Respiratory FailureOutlines
• Description
• Classification of Respiratory Failure
• Etiology of Respiratory Failure
• Pathophysiology of Respiratory Failure
• Clinical Manifestation of Respiratory Failure
• Diagnostic tests
• Management of Acute Respiratory Failure

Respiratory Failure
Definition: Known as acute lung failure, is the 
inability of the respiratory system to maintain 
adequate gas exchange.

Classification of Respiratory Failure
Type I Respiratory Failure: Hypoxemic
normocapnic failure or oxygenation failure, the body
fails to deliver an adequate supply of oxygen to the
arterial blood. The patient presents with a low PaO2
less than 60 mmHg and a normal PaCO2.

Type II Respiratory Failure: Hypoxemic
hypercapnic failure or ventilatory failure, the body
ineffectively eliminates carbon dioxide (CO2) from
the arterial blood. The patient presents with a low
PaO2 less than 60 mmHg and PaCO2 is greater
than 50 mmHg and pH is less than or equal 7.30.

Etiology of Respiratory Failure
• Extra-pulmonary causes include disorders that affect the brain, the 
spinal cord, the neuromuscular system, the thorax, the pleura, and 
the upper airways.
• Intra-pulmonary causes include disorders that affect the lower 
airways and alveoli, the pulmonary circulation, and the alveolar-
capillary membrane.

Etiology of Acute Lung Failure
Extra-pulmonary
Brain
➢ Drug overdose (opioids, sedatives)
➢ Brain trauma or lesion
➢ Postoperative general anesthesia depression
Spinal cord ➢ Guillain-Barre syndrome Poliomyelitis
➢ Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
➢ Spinal cord trauma or lesion
Neuromuscular system
➢ Myasthenia Gravis 
➢ Neuromuscular-blocking agents
➢ Organophosphate poisoning 
➢ Muscular dystrophy

Cont, Etiology of Acute Lung Failure
Extra pulmonary
Thorax ➢ Massive obesity
➢ Chest trauma
Pleura ➢ Pleural effusion 
Pneumothorax
➢ Malignancy
Upper airways ➢ Trachea obstruction 
➢ Epiglottitis
➢ Vocal cord paralysis

Cont, Etiology of Acute Lung Failure
IntrapulmonaryLower airways and alveoli
➢ Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
➢ Asthma
➢ Bronchiolitis
➢ Cystic fibrosis
➢ Pneumonia
Pulmonary circulation
➢ Pulmonary Emboli
➢ ARDS
Alveolar-capillary membrane ➢ Inhalation of toxic gases 
➢ Near-drowning

Pathophysiology of Respiratory Failure
• Hypoxemia is the result of impaired gas 
exchange and is the hallmark of ARF.
• The main causes of hypoxemia are:
• Alveolar hypoventilation
• Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatching
• Intrapulmonary shunting

1. Alveolar hypoventilation
It occurs when the amount of oxygen being
brought into the alveoli is insufficient to meet the
metabolic need of the body. This can be the result
of increasing metabolic oxygen needs or
decreasing ventilation. Hypoxemia caused by
alveolar hypoventilation is associated with
hypercapnia and commonly results from extra-
pulmonary disorders.

2. Ventilation/ Perfusion (V/Q) 
Mismatching
• Occurs when ventilation and blood flow are 
mismatched in various regions of the lung in excess 
of what is normal. V/ Q mismatch occurs when 
some perfused alveoli are flooded or collapsed as 
occurs with pneumonia and pulmonary edema 
(V<Q)

• some alveoli are ventilated but not perfused
because of capillary thrombosis as occurs in
pulmonary embolism (V>Q).

3. Intrapulmonary shunting
• Shunt refer to the state in which pulmonary capillary
perfusion is normal, but alveolar ventilation is lacking.
Intrapulmonary shunt occurs when pulmonary capillary
blood passes a nonfunctioning alveoli unit cannot pick
up oxygen from the alveoli or reaches the arterial
system without participating in gas exchange.

• The mixing of unoxygenated (shunted) blood and
oxygenated blood lowers the average level of
oxygen present in the blood. This may be the
result of
• Alveolar collapse secondary to atelectasis or
• Alveolar flooding with pus, blood or fluid.

• If hypoxia progress can result in a decrease of oxygen at
the cellular level. As the tissue demands for continue and
the supply diminishes, oxygen supply/demand imbalance
occurs and tissue hypoxia develops. Decreased oxygen to
the cells contributes to impaired tissue perfusion and the
development of lactic acidosis and multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome.

Manifestation of Respiratory failure
• are usually related to development of hypoxemia, hypercapnia and acidosis.
1. Central Nervous System Manifestations include: Restlessness, agitation and 
confusion.
2. Cardiovascular Manifestations: Tachycardia and dysrhythmias.
3. Pulmonary Manifestations: Tachypnea, dyspnea, shortness of breath and use of 
accessory muscles.
4. Renal Manifestations: Decrease urine output and edema.

Cont, Manifestation of Respiratory 
failure
5. Gastro-intestinal Manifestations: Decrease 
bowel sounds, nausea and vomiting and 
anorexia.
6. Skin Manifestation: Pallor and cyanosis.

Diagnostic tests
1. ABG analysis conform the level of PaCO2 of 50 
mmHg or greater, the Pao2 less than 60 mmHg 
and blood PH less than 7.30.
2. Bronchoscopy for airway surveillance or Specimen 
retrieval
3. Chest radiography
4. Thoracic ultrasound
5. Thoracic computed tomography (CT)
6. Selected lung function studies

Management of Acute Respiratory 
Failure
Aimed to:
➢ Correct underlining cause
➢ Promoting adequate gas exchange
➢ Correcting acidosis
➢ Initiating nutrition support
➢ Preventing complications

1. Oxygenation
Improve oxygenation through :
❖ Supplemental oxygen administration, either with a low flow system or a high
flow system
❖ Use of positive airway pressure to correct hypoxemia within the arterial
hemoglobin oxygen saturation greater than 90% without cause hypercapnia or
oxygen toxicity.
❖ Positive pressure is necessary to open collapsed alveoli and facility their
participation in gas exchange. Positive pressure is delivered by invasive or non
invasive (by the mask) mechanical ventilation.

2. Ventilation
• Intervention to improve ventilation includes the use of
invasive and noninvasive mechanical ventilation depending
on causes and severity of disease. Patients with a PH less
than 7.25 need for invasive mechanical ventilation and
started on volume ventilation in the assist/ control mode.

3- Pharmacology
• Medication to facilitate dilation of the airway and may be also
beneficial in the treatment of patients with ARF.
❖ Bronchodilators such as B2 agonists and anticholinergic agents
aid in smooth muscle relaxation.
❖ Steroids administer to decrease airway inflammation and
enhance the effect of B2 agonists.
❖Sedation used to assist with maintaining adequate ventilation. It
can be used to comfort the patients and decrease work of
breathing, if the patient is fighting the ventilator.

❖Analgesics should be administered for control
pain.
❖Neuromuscular paralysis may be necessary to
facilitate optimal ventilation and decrease
oxygen consumption in the severe
compromised patient.

4. Acidosis
➢Acidosis may occur due to hypoxemia, and impaired
ventilation causes impaired tissue perfusion which leads
to the production of lactic acid and the development of
metabolic acidosis. Impaired ventilation leads to
accumulation of carbon dioxide and development of
respiratory acidosis.

➢To treat respiratory acidosis administer oxygen
because once the patient is adequately oxygenated
and ventilated, the acidosis should correct itself.
➢Intubation and mechanical ventilation will be
necessary for management of respiratory acidosis,
sever hypoxemia and depression of respiratory
center.

❖ Sodium bicarbonate therapy shifts the oxygen –
hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left and can 
worsen tissue hypoxia.
❖ Sodium bicarbonate may be used if the acidosis is 
sever (PH less than 7.10), refractory to therapy, and 
causing dysrhythmias or hemodynamic instability.

5- Nutrition Support
The goal of nutrition support are:
➢Meet the overall nutrition needs of the patient while
avoiding overfeeding.
➢Avoid nutrition delivery related complication and
➢ Improve patient outcomes.

➢The enteral route is preferred method of
nutrition administration. If the patients cannot
tolerate enteral feeding, the parenteral route will
be started.
➢Nutrition support should be initiated before the
third day of MV for the well nourished patient
and within 24h for the malnourished.

Complications
❖Ischemic anoxic encephalopathy: result from hypoxemia, 
hypercapnia, and acidosis.
❖Dysrhythmias are precipitated by hypoxemia, acidosis,electrolytes 
imbalances.
❖Venous thromboempolism: precipitated by venous stasis resulting
from immobility and can be prevented through the use of
intermittent pneumatic compression device and low dose of
unfractionated heparin or low molecular weight heparin.

Cont, complication
❖GIT bleeding can be prevented through the use of 
histamine receptor antagonists, Cytoprotective agent 
or proton pump inhibitors.
❖Others complication associated with an artificial 
airways, mechanical ventilation, enteral or parenteral 
nutrition and peripheral arterial cannulation.

NURSING DIAGNOSES
Acute Lung Failure
1. Impaired Gas Exchange related to alveolar hypoventilation.
2. Impaired Gas Exchange related to ventilation-perfusion
mismatching or intrapulmonary shunting.
3. Ineffective Breathing Pattern related to musculoskeletal fatigue or neuro-muscular
impairment.
4. Risk for Aspiration.
5. Imbalanced Nutrition: Less Than Body Requirements related to lack of exogenous
nutrients and increased metabolic demand.
6. Risk for Infection.

Optimizing Oxygenation and Ventilation through
1. Positioning
2. Preventing desaturation 
3. Promoting secretion clearance.

1. Positioning
1. Patients with V/Q mismatching, positioning is
used to facilitate better matching of ventilation
with perfusion to optimize gas exchange.
2. The goal of positioning is to place the least
affected area of the lungs in the most dependent
position.

3. Patient with unilateral lung disease should be positioned with the healthy 
lung in a dependent position. 
4. Patients with diffuse lungs disease should be positioned with the right lung 
down, because it is larger and more vascular than the left lung.
5. Patients with alveolar hypoventilation to facilitate ventilation, place in 
nonrecumbent position such as sitting or semisitting position.
6. Frequent repositioning every 2h is beneficial on patient’s ventilatory
pattern and V/Q.

2. Prevention of Desaturation
Intervention to minimizing oxygen consumption includes:
1. Limiting the patient’s physical activity through
➢ Performing procedures only as needed, hyperoxyorgenating before
suction.
➢ Providing adequate rest and recovery time between procedures.
➢ Administering sedation to control anxiety
➢ Providing measure to control fever
➢ Continuous monitoring of plus oximeter to warn of signs of
desaturation

Promoting Secretion Clearance
✓ Provide adequate systemic hydration and humidifying
supplemental oxygen.
✓ Coughing and suction and postural drainage and chest
percussion and vibration.
✓ The patient’s thorax should be maintained in alignment and
the head of the bed elevated 30 to 45 degree.
✓ This position best accommodates diaphragmatic descent and
intercostals muscles action.

✓ Once the patient’s is extubated: Deep breathing and incentive
spirometry should be stared as possible.
✓ Incentive spirometry involves having the patient’s take at least 10 deep
effective breaths per hour using incentive spirometry. This action help
prevent atelectasis and re expand any collapsed lung tissue.
✓ The chest should be auscultated during inflation to ensure that all
dependant parts of lung are well ventilated.
✓ Coughing should be avoided unless secretions are present because it
promotes collapse of smaller airways.

Education of the Patient and Family
• At discharge, teaching should focus on the intervention necessary
for preventing the reoccurrence of the precipitating disorders
• If patient’s smokes, he/she should be encouraged to stop smoking
and referred to a smoking cessation.
• Stress the importance of precipitating in a pulmonary
rehabilitation.