Shock Syndrome
Outlines: 
– Definition of Shock 
– Stages of Shock Syndrome 
– Types  of Shock 
– Pathophysiology of Shock 
– Assessment and Diagnosis of Shock 
– Medical Management of  different types of Shock
– Hypovolemic /cardiogenic/septic/anaphylactic /neurogenic Shock 
• Definition  
• Pathophysiology 
• Clinical Manifestation 
• Assessment of hemodynamic parameters 
• Medical  and nursing management of different types of shock

Shock
Definition: Shock is an acute, widespread process of
impaired tissue perfusion that results in cellular, metabolic,
and hemodynamic alterations.

Types of shock
All types of shock eventually result in ineffective
tissue perfusion and develop due to imbalance
between cellular oxygen supply and cellular demand
results in acute circulatory failure or shock
syndrome.

Types of Shock  
1- Hypovolemic Shock results from a loss of 
circulating or intravascular volume.  
2- Cardiogenic Shock results from the impaired 
ability of the heart to pump.  
3- Distributive Shock results from maldistribution 
of circulating blood volume and can be further 
classified as septic, anaphylactic, or neurogenic.

Cont, types of shock
4- Septic Shock is the result of microorganisms 
entering the body.  
5-Anaphylactic shock is the result of a severe 
antibody-antigen reaction.  
6-Neurogenic Shock is the result of the loss of 
sympathetic tone

Stages of shock 
Initial Stage 
Compensatory Stage 
Progressive Stage 
Refractory Stage

Pathophysiology of the Initial Stage 
➢Decreased cardiac output and impaired tissue
perfusion causes the cells to switch from Aerobic to
Anaerobic metabolism as a source of energy.
➢Anaerobic metabolism produces small amounts of
energy but large amounts of lactic acid.
➢Lactic acidemia causes cellular damage

Pathophysiology of the Compensatory Stage 
The compensatory mechanisms are mediated by the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and consist of : 
• Neural response  
• Hormonal response § Chemical response

Assessment and Diagnosis of shock 
• Change in vital signs and hemodynamic parameter 
due to decrease tissue perfusion and initiation of 
compensatory mechanism. 
• Mean Arterial Blood Pressure (MAP) less than 60 
mm Hg and Systolic blood pressure less than 90 
mm Hg and tachycardia or bradycardia.

Cont, Assessment
• Altered mental status is considered to be a shock state, 
patient become restlessness, agitation, and then confused 
and lethargic due to decrease perfusion to the brain.
• Tachypnea, hypoxemia and worsening chest X-Ray related to 
development of acute respiratory distress syndrome due to 
hypoperfusion. 
• Decrease urine output, rising BUN and creatinine levels 
due to initiation of compensatory mechanism and 
decrease renal perfusion

Cont, Assessment
Petechiae, ecchymosis, bleeding from puncture sites and occult 
blood in urine, stool, gastric aspirate and tracheal aspirate related 
to development of disseminated intravascular coagulation. 
Hypoglycemia and increase in liver enzymes related to hepatic 
dysfunction due to hypoperfusion. 
Decrease skin turgor and dehydration due to hypovolemia.

Complication  
of shock
Cardiovascular 
• Ventricular failure 
• Micro vascular thrombosis 
Neurologic 
• Sympathetic nervous system dysfunction « 
Cardiac and respiratory depression · 
Thermoregulatory failure 
• Coma 
Pulmonary 
• Acute lung failure 
• Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) 
Renal 
Acute kidney injury 
Hematologic 
• Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation 
Gastrointestinal 
• Gastrointestinal tract failure 
• Liver failure 
• Pancreatic failure

Management of Shock 
Management Goals:   
Preservation of tissue perfusion 
Adequate pulmonary gas exchange is critical to 
oxygen transport 
Establishing and maintaining an adequate airway are 
the first steps in ensuring adequate oxygenation

Management Of Shock
Adequate pulmonary gas exchange
1. Establishing and maintaining an adequate airway.
2. After the airway is patent, emphasis is placed on
improving ventilation and oxygenation by
administration of supplemental oxygen and
mechanical ventilator/ support.

Cont, Managment
3- An adequate Cardiac Output (CO) and
hemoglobin level are crucial to oxygen transport.
CO depends on heart rate, preload, after-load, and
contractility.

Cont, management of shock
4- Fluid administration can be accomplished with
use of a crystalloid solution, a colloid solution,
blood products, or a combination of fluids to restore
intravascular volume, maintain oxygen carrying
capacity and establish the hemodynamic stability.
5-The choice of fluid and volume and rate of
infusion depend on the type of fluid loss, the
patient’s hemodynamic status and coexisted
condition.

Cont, Managment
6-The medications used include vasoconstrictors,
vasodilators, positive inotropes, and anti
dysrhythmias

Medications
Medication Action and Use
Dobutamine (Dobutrex) Stimulates primarily beta1 receptors to increase contractility and increase HR and causes
vasodilation in low-CO states
Dopamine
(Intropin)
• Used in low- CO states or vasodilatory states (distributive shock) to restore
vascular tone.
Epinephrine · Used in hypertensive states to produce constriction of vascular smooth muscle ·
Promote bronchodilation in anaphylactic shock
Norepinephrine
(Levophed)
• Stimulate alpha receptors, which causes vasoconstriction
• Used in vasodilatory states (distributive shock) to restore vascular tone.
• Stimulation of beta receptors, which increase
contractility and HR

Medications for shock
Nitroglycrin
• Vasodilation by direct smooth
muscle relaxation, predominantly venous ·
Used in preload and/ or afterload
reduction
(cardiogenic shock)
• Dose dependent effect · Arterial dilation only if
infusion >1 mcg/kg/min
Nitroprusside (Nipride)
· Vasodilation by direct smooth muscle relaxation,
predominantly arterial · Used in preload and/ or
afterload reduction
(cardiogenic shock)

Evaluate your self
1. What is the main characteristic of shock?
A. Increased cardiac output
B. Normal tissue perfusion
C. Increased urine output
D. Decreased tissue perfusion
2. Which type of shock results from severe blood or fluid loss?
A. Cardiogenic shock
B. Septic shock
C. Hypovolemic shock
D. Neurogenic shock

Evaluate your self
3. The most common cause of cardiogenic shock is:
A. Pulmonary embolism
B. Myocardial infarction
C. Spinal cord injury
D. Anemia
4. The primary problem in all types of shock is:
A. Decreased tissue perfusion
B. Increased blood flow
C. High blood pressure
D. Increased oxygen delivery