Prepared by :
Assist professor Dr: Afaf Mohamed Mansour

Outlines.
❖Introduction
❖Definition
❖Goals of Triage
❖Advantages of triage
❖Location and structure of triage area
❖General Considerations of Triage

Outlines.
 Factors affecting on triage
 Global overview about patient condition by using The Emergency Severity Index 
(ESI) (hospital triage)
 Types of triage
 Triage Systems:
              ***Functions of triage system
     *** Types of triage system:
 Triage Staffing
 Personal abilities that are be an effective triage nurse

Introduction:
Triage is typically the first step in the 
evaluation of a patient presenting to an 
emergency department (ED). This process 
involves a brief assessment that focuses on 
the patient's clinical needs and priority for 
care. The triage nurse then assigns the 
patient a place in queue and to an 
appropriate treatment area of the ED based 
on that assessment.

Definition: 
Triage is a process of sorting or 
classifying patients based on severity of 
illness or injury for each patient who 
enters the emergency department (ED).

Goals of Triage: 
The primary goals of an effective triage system 
are 
• Rapid identification of patients with urgent, life-
threatening conditions. 
• Prioritizing care needs for all patients
• Ensure that treatment is appropriately and timely
• Regulating patient flow though the ED. 
• Avoid unnecessary congestion in emergency 
treatment areas.

Advantages of triage:
Benefits of triage include:
 For the patients:
❑Decrease patient's waiting time.
❑The positive feelings by patients that 
they have received attention shortly 
after arrival. 
❑ Decrease patient's treatment time.

Advantages of triage:
Benefits of triage include:
For the health care team:
• Ensure quality of health care
• Assure safety, security and 
appropriate condition for 
health care providers

Location and structure of triage area:
The triage area should be located by the front door, the triage area should 
be large enough to allow privacy for the interview without interfering 
with the triage nurse's ability to see patients .
• Telephone is needed for consultation, and referrals. Privacy should be 
maintained.
• A stretcher and wheel chair should be available in or adjacent to the 
triage area.
• Equipment for immediate emergency treatment i.e. airway, bag, mask, 
etc should be available.
• A sink for hand washing should be available.

General Considerations of Triage:
1- Greet patients, identify our self and explain what we are 
doing.
2- Maintain patient confidentiality. 
3- Try to visualize all incoming patients even while interviewing 
others. 
4- Maintain the flow of information between triage personnel and 
patients in the waiting area. 
5- Excellent communication is essential. 
6 - Know the institution's system and its own limitations.
7- Keep in mind the primary objectives of the triage role and use 
resources to maintain the appropriate standard of care.

General Considerations of Triage:
8- Formal process of immediate 
assessment of patients presenting to ED, 
in addition to, ongoing process of 
continuous assessment and reassessment 
to promote patient safety via accurate 
assessment, prioritizing and provision of 
intervention.
9- Finally, classifies patients into groups 
according to severity of illness or injury.

Factors affecting on triage:
1. Number of ED visits per day. 
2. Times of peak activity.
3. Number of qualified triage staff and availability of 
consultation staff. 
4. Presence of a walk in clinics or other treatment areas 
outside the ED. 
5. Logistic and administrative concerns.

Triage priority Levels (methods):
A.Triage consist from Three level
B.Triage consist from Four level:
C.Triage consists from Five level

I) Emergent Categories 
ExampleTime neededDefinition
• Cardiac arrest . 
• Airway obstructions .  
• Hemorrhage with shock .
• Complicated delivery.         
• Seizure 
• Asthma  
• A cute bleeding or acute pain . 
• Depressed level of consciousness.
requires treatment 
immediately or within 15 to 
30 minutes .
Those that are life 
threatening , but likely 
to be amenable to 
rapid intervention that 
does not require an 
inordinate amount of 
resources .

II) Urgent Categories 
ExampleTime neededDefinition
• Complex long bone 
fracture .
• Bleeding controlled with 
a pressure dressing.
• A cute psychiatric 
problem 
• High fever with other 
vital signs stable 
serious illness or injury that 
must be attended to, but 
wait of up to 2 hours 
Those conditions that 
are serious and if not 
treated in timely 
manner , are likely to 
deteriorate to become 
critical .

III) Nonurgent Categories
Example Time needed Definition 
- Minor laceration which 
require sutures.
- Minor joint trauma which 
requires an X- ray for 
diagnosis .
- Request for medication 
refills.
- Chronic conditions that 
are stable Such as 
preexisting skin rash
conditions that can 
wait more than 2 hours.
conditions that can wait 
without likelihood of 
deterioration .

Triage consist from Four level:
The triage system is mainly used by health professionals in Disasters 
1. Category I (emergent) (red) : Used for viable victims with potentially life threatening 
conditions. compromised airway, shock hemorrhage
2. Category II urgent (yellow) : Used for victims with non -life threatening injuries, but 
who urgently require treatment. open fracture, chest wound 
3. Category III nonurgent (green) : Used for victims with minor injuries that do not 
require ambulance transport. minor injuries; walking wounded —closed fracture, sprain, 
strain 
4. Category 0 expectant (black): Used for victims who are dead, or whose injuries make 
survival unlikely.

C. Triage consists from Five level: 
Most common triage systems consist of five levels of acuity as in
All patients presenting to emergency departments should be assessed in order to 
determine whether their condition requires medical intervention to avoid unnecessarily 
adverse outcomes within: 
Levels Urgency
1. Resuscitation Immediately
2. Emergency Minutes
3. Urgent An hour
4. Acute Hours
5. Non-urgent Days

1) Triage Level I "Resuscitation"
Conditions requiring immediate nursing and physician assessment and any 
delay in treatment is potentially life- or limb-threatening.
Conditions includes such as
▪ Airway compromise                                   Cardiac arrest
▪ Severe shock                                             Cervical spine injury
▪ Multisystem trauma                                   - unconsciousness 
▪ Eclampsia

2) Triage Level II "Emergent"
Conditions requiring nursing assessment and physician 
assessment within 15 minutes of arrival
Conditions include the following 
▪ Head injuries                                 Severe trauma                      
▪  Lethargy or agitation                 Conscious overdose                        
▪   Severe allergic reaction              Chemical exposure to the eyes                       
▪   Back & Chest pain               GI bleed with unstable vital signs                         
▪   Stroke with deficit                                 severe asthma                        
▪  Abdominal pain in patients older than age 50                        
Vomiting and diarrhea with dehydration           Fever in infants 
younger than 3 months

3) Triage Level III ''Urgent''
Conditions that are required nursing and physician assessment within 30 
minutes from arrival.
Conditions include
▪ Head injury with vomiting
▪ Moderate asthma
▪ Moderate trauma
▪ Abuse or neglect
▪ GI bleed with stable vital signs
▪ History of seizure

4) Triage Level IV "Less Urgent":
Conditions requiring nursing and physician assessment within one hour 
from arrival.
Conditions include
▪ head injury without vomiting
▪ Minor trauma
▪ Vomiting and diarrhea in patient older than age 2 without dehydration
▪ Earache
▪ Minor allergic reaction
▪ Corneal foreign body
▪ Chronic back pain

Global overview about patient condition by using The Emergency Severity 
Index (ESI) (hospital triage):
The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an 
initial measure of patient assessment in the 
emergency department (ED). It rates 
patients based on acuity and predicted 
resource intensity from Level 1 (most ill) to 
Level 5 (least resource intensive). Already 
implemented in several US hospitals
Is patient dying ?
Level II, III, IV, V
Can patient wait ?
How many resources ?
Yes No 
Level I
Yes No 
Level II
E
M
E
R
G
E
N
C
Y
S
E
V
E
R
I
T
Y
I
N
D
E
X
Level III, IV, V
ONE
Level IV
➢TWO
Level III
NON
Level V

Types of triage:
1- Simple triage
2- Advanced triage
3- Reverse triage
4- Telephone Triage

Types of triage:
1- Simple triage:-
is usually used in a scene of a "mass-casualty 
incident" (is any incident in which emergency 
medical services personnel and equipment at the 
scene are overwhelmed by the number and severity 
of casualties as in such as earthquakes, hurricanes 
and accidents.)

1- Simple triage:-
Use of printed triage tags (Triage Tags is a tool first 
responders and medical personnel use during a mass 
casualty incident). 
Aim of the simple triage:-
❑ The first-arriving personnel are able to effectively and 
efficiently distribute the limited resources 
❑ Provide the necessary immediate care for the victims 
until more help arrives or colored flagging

Colored flagging (Colored non-adhesive tape used in marking 
objects)
A color-coding scheme using red, yellow, green, white, and black 
tags:
 Red tags - (immediate) are used to label those who cannot survive 
without immediate treatment but who have a chance of survival.
▪ Yellow tags - (observation) for those who require observation (and 
possible later re -triage). Their condition is stable for the moment 
and, they are not in immediate danger of death. These victims will 
still need hospital care and would be treated immediately under 
normal circumstances.

Colored flagging Colored non-adhesive tape used in marking objects
 Green tags - (wait) are reserved for the "walking wounded" who will need 
medical care at some point, after more critical injuries have been treated. 
   White tags  -      (dismiss) are given to those with minor injuries for whom 
a doctor's care is not required. 
 Black tags - (expectant) are used for the deceased and for those whose 
injuries are so extensive that they will not be able to survive given the care 
that is available

2- Advanced triage:- 
❖In advanced triage, doctors may decide that some 
seriously injured people should not receive advanced 
care because they are unlikely to survive.
❖Advanced care will be used on patients with less 
severe injuries.

2- Advanced triage:- 
❖Advanced triage has ethical implications. It is used to 
divert scarce resources away from patients with little 
chance of survival in order to increase the chances of 
survival of others who are more likely to survive.
❖This has happened in disasters such as volcanic 
eruptions, and rail accidents. In these cases some 
percentage of patients will die regardless of medical care 
because of the severity of their injuries. Others would 
live if given immediate medical care, but would die 
without it.

3- Reverse triage
✓This is a system in which the less wounded are given preferential 
treatment over other more serious patients.
✓This type of system is common on the battlefields where the 
slightly wounded soldiers are quickly treated and sent back into the 
fray or in situations where physicians or other essential caregivers 
are among the wounded in which case, they are quickly treated so 
that they can recover quickly and assist the other caregivers. 
✓Wounded physicians receive priority treatment in reverse triage 
systems.

4- Telephone Triage:
Telephone calls eliciting medical 
information and advice are 
problematic for EDs since evaluation 
of patients by phone is difficult if not 
impossible Most legal experts do not 
recommend giving advice and suggest 
the caller be directed to the ED.

Telephone Triage:
❖In situations such as cardiopulmonary re suscitation or childbirth, 
giving appropriate instructions un til emergency medical personnel 
arrive may positively affect the outcome.
❖ Hospitals providing telephone informa tion need standardized 
protocols and a mechanism for documentation so that every call can 
be logged, tape-recorded, or both. 
❖Some EDs are providing special ser vices to meet this consumer need 
for information. 
❖Trained nurses dedicated to telephone consultation using personal 
computers, specially designed software, telephone record ing systems, 
and facsimile machines create an opportunity for EDs to strengthen 
their medical advice programs for the community.

Triage system
A triage system is a method for assessing patients 
to prioritize medical care based on the severity of 
their condition, rather than their arrival time.

Functions of triage system: 
Any triage system has, primary and 
secondary functions. 
1)Primary functions  include assessment 
and reassessment of the patient's chief 
complaint and related symptoms, taking 
a brief history, physical assessment, and 
measuring vital signs.

***Functions of triage system: 
1)Secondary functions include clerical tasks, directions, 
telephone advice, ambulance patient evaluation, 
ambulance dispatch, stocking of supplies, cleaning, 
equipment maintenance, crowd control, security, and 
information. 
A triage system encompasses all these functions depends 
on the daily census, available staff, presence of walk -in 
clinics or same-day clinics, type and availability of health 
care providers, availability of specialty treatment areas, 
and environmental, legal, and administrative constraints.

Types of triage system:
1- Traffic director  (Type I) triage system: in type I 
system nonprofessionals (i.e. receptionists, clerks or 
allied health personnel) are the first persons to 
interact with the patient. Their assessment is cursory. 
They determine the chief complaint and classify the 
patient as "sick" or "not sick" on the basis of 
appearance. Patients are the directed to the waiting 
area. Documentation is sparse or absent, and no 
diagnostic procedures are initiated.

Types of triage system:
2- Spot checker  (Type II) triage system: in this system is done by a 
registered nurse or a physician. Both subjective and objective data 
related to the chief complaint are evaluated and documented, and an 
urgency rating is assigned . Initiation of diagnostic procedures in this 
system may be inconsistent and varies with the institution. 
1) Patients may be directed to a specific care area or they may even be 
treated and released by triage physician.